
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 2 —
THE MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
by H. Spencer Lewis
© 1929, 1953, 1981 and 2015 Supreme Grand Lodge Of The Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis. All Rights Reserved.
This publication is for your personal, private use only, and may not be used for any commercial purpose. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, displayed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval systems, without the express and prior written permission of Supreme Grand Lodge Of The Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in reviews. For permission requests, please contact: Supreme Grand Lodge Of The Ancient And Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, Inc., Rosicrucian Park, 1342 Naglee Ave, San Jose, California 95191.
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Although every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor the publisher shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in this book.
DEDICATION
To the
Chevaliers of the Militia
in the large party
of men and women from all
parts of North America who
accompanied my family and myself in
our long and tedious journey through
Palestine, Egypt, Italy, Turkey, Greece,
Switczerland, France, Germany, and England,
in search of Holy Shrines and the
verification of the facts known to us
through our years of joint
study and research.
THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
as a Souvenir of our Holy
Mission and our Illumination in the year 1929.
CONTENTS
Dedication
Introduction
1.
The Mystery of the Essenes
2.
The Neighbors of Jesus
3.
The Parents of Jesus
4.
The Virgin Birth of Avatars
5.
The Mystical Birth of Jesus
6.
The Birthplace and the Magi
7.
The Birthdate of the Holy Child
8.
The Childhood of Jesus
9.
Jesus Enters the Priesthood
10.
Jesus Enters the Secret Priesthood
11.
Jesus Attains Mastership
12.
Jesus Attains Christhood
13.
The Mystic Beginning of Christ’s Mission
14.
His Real Doctrines and Miracles
15.
The Truth About the Crucifixion
16.
The Secret Facts of the Resurrection
17.
The Unknown Life of Jesus
Some Interesting Criticisms
EXPLANATION OF THE TERMS “ARYAN” AND “GREAT WHITE BROTHERHOOD”
These special terms are defined by Rosicrucians as follows: In the Rosicrucian teachings the word Aryan is used to denote the prehistoric culture and root-language behind Sanskrit and most extant Indo-European languages today. Dictionaries state that the word Aryan comes from the Sanskrit arya, an adjective meaning noble. The Oxford English Dictionary defines Aryan as “A member of the Aryan family; one belonging to, or descended from, the ancient people who spoke the parent Aryan language.” This family of languages includes Sanskrit, Zend, Persian, Greek, Latin, Celtic, Teutonic, and Slavonic—in other words, the present-day Indo-European languages. Rosicrucians also define Aryan as referring to the prehistoric Atlantean wise beings—the “Light Bearing” or “Enlightened Ones.” As far as race is concerned, the original wise beings who taught the Aryan language and culture were called Atlanteans, and as a distinctive racial type, disappeared in prehistoric times. However, it was their sacred Atlantean culture—the traditions, institutions, and hieroglyphic alphabet known as Sensar— which was cultivated as Sanskrit, the ancient Aryan language of the Hindus of India.
In Rosicrucian terminology the Great White Brotherhood (G.W.B.) consists of all the enlightened soul personalities who, independent of religions and traditions, are commissioned to work in one of the twelve paths of the ancient mystical tradition. It is that invisible body of mystics composed of the most exalted and advanced spiritual leaders in various lands throughout the world. The word White in this phrase alludes to Light, the illumination of understanding, wisdom, and spirituality as expressed by enlightened soul personalities, and has nothing to do with race. Rosicrucians realize that these cosmic masters work in the service of humanity. The Rosicrucian Order, AMORC, is only one of the channels that has been used and is still being used by the G.W.B. for the development and progress of humanity’s own spiritual and esoteric unfoldment and for the improvement of civilization.
— 8 —
INTRODUCTION
IT IS A fact that very often truth is far more interesting than fiction. It is particularly so in regard to the life of Jesus. Perhaps it is due to the cosmic cycle through which humanity is passing, or perhaps it is due solely to our intellectual development, but people have become more interested in the life of the Great Redeemer than they have been in any other period since the dawn of Christianity.
In my contact with seekers for spiritual truths, covering twenty-five years, I have found that inevitably the student of mysticism, metaphysics, psychology and occultism is drawn to a more minute and analytical study of the life and teachings of the Christ, Jesus. His whole career, his doctrines, parables, miracles, and illuminating inferences, gradually fascinate and attune the spiritual side of mystical students, and they become restless until they can fathom the mysteries of Jesus’s life.
Why there are any mysteries in the life of Jesus is revealed in chapters in this book. After many years of careful study and research, even to the extent of visiting the holy and mystical places of Europe, Palestine, and Egypt, I am still unprepared to say whether the church authorities who authorized the incomplete, partly erroneous, and greatly veiled life of Jesus as it appears in the Christian Bible were justified in their actions or not. Certain it is, not all are prepared even today to comprehend, nor apprehend, the mystical significance of most of the mysteries associated with pristine Christianity. That there are thousands, perhaps several millions, now ready for the truth is undeniable; but even so, they are but a small fraction of those who have accepted and found peace and salvation through the offerings of the Christian church.
To those who in orthodox sincerity will reject much that is presented in this book, I can say only: “Hold fast to that which is good!” If your faith, your knowledge, and your conviction in regard to Christian matters serves you well, and there is no inner urge to look beyond the veil, then do not do so. Permit nothing to weaken or lessen your adoration and worship of him who is your Savior and your Lord.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 9 —
To those who believe that a more intimate knowledge of Jesus, the
Son of God, the Master, the Avatar, and the Mystic, will endear him to
their hearts, and to those who feel that the inner self needs more light
on the mysteries of his mission, I present the chapters of The Mystical
Life of Jesus as a comprehensive survey of things long held in seclusion
by a few, but now deserving of wider circulation.
The story of the life and mission of Jesus as presented in this book
makes no sectarian appeal. I know, as a fact, that the Jesus revealed
herein is acceptable to as many Jews as Gentiles, to as many Roman
Catholics as Protestants; and in these days of religious controversy and
profound concern regarding the growth of the numberless thousands
who do not attend any church and who seem to be losing their interest
in religious matters, I am happy to say that I know that thousands will
find in this book a key to their problem and an incentive to reread the
Christian Bible and reconsider their rejection of the church.
I said I know these things. Through my official capacity I am in daily
contact with many thousands of such persons in North America and
thousands in other lands. In my public lectures throughout the United
States for twelve years, in personal interviews with the spiritually
restless among the populace, and in journeys to foreign lands, I have
seen the effect of these truths. Parts of the chapters in this book have
been used in public discourses, some of the interesting facts have been
used in private lessons, and others have been presented in personal
conversations. The result has always been an awakening of interest in
the life and teachings of Jesus, and generally a happy realization that
Jesus and his doctrines were wholly acceptable in the newer revelations.
In the past few years, certain pamphlets have appeared claiming to
contain hidden facts regarding the life of Jesus. In most cases these
stories contained such improbabilities or inconsistencies as to condemn
them as fabrications. Several of the most popular of these have
claimed that they were the result of a discovery of some rare manuscript
or record hitherto hidden in a secluded monastery. The real origin
of all that was dependable in such pamphlets was the uncovering of
certain holy books of the ancients which did contain casual references
to incidents in the life of Jesus rejected by the church authorities when
the first versions of the Bible were authentically compiled.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 10 —
The facts contained in this book are not drawn from any newly
discovered manuscripts, writings, or records. In fact, it cannot be said
that the facts contained herein are new to either the founders of the
early Christian church, to the most profound and analytical writers of
spiritual subjects, or to the most advanced of mystics in many lands.
The Rosicrucian archives in foreign lands, embracing the records of
the Essenes, the Nazarenes, and the Nazarites, as well as the complete
records of the Great White Brotherhood in Tibet, India, and Egypt,
have always been sources of knowledge for the worthy inquirer into
the history of all avatars and especially into the history of Jesus. It is
from this dependable source that all the facts contained in this book
have been drawn—not at one time and not without years of labor and
indefatigable study and service.
Wherever possible, verification or substantiation has been secured
from the writings and records of the early church leaders, historians, or
archivists. Extracts have also been taken from the writings of Jews, and
even from the so-called heathens, whenever possible. Such citations
are plainly indicated.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank all those who in past years
have carefully examined portions of my writings on this subject and
have called my attention to additional points which should be covered.
I wish also to thank those members in my tour to the Near East during
the months of January, February, and March of this year, who acted as
my companions in my special researches, and aided my secretary and
myself in securing the information needed to give personal verification
to the important statements contained in this book. It was a glorious
work and I hope that these many companions will find some rewards
for their efforts in the book which I have dedicated to them.
—H. Spencer Lewis
Egyptian Temple, Rosicrucian
Park San Jose, California
April 15, 1929
*Biblical quotations in this edition are from the New Revised Standard Version (NRSV)
translation of the Bible.
— 11 —
Chapter 1
THE MYSTERY OF THE ESSENES
BEFORE ONE CAN properly understand and appreciate the history and real story of the birth and life work of the Master Jesus, one must have an understanding of the ancient organizations and schools which contributed to the preparation for his coming.
Within the last 100 years, a great many notations in sacred literature have been discovered relating to the Essenian community and the activities of this organization in Palestine just prior to and during the lifetime of the Master Jesus. Many of these notations have verified the references to the Essenes by such eminent historians as Philo and Josephus, and have explained many of the mysterious references found in the sacred writings of the Hebrews as translated in the Christian Bible.
The possible relationship of the Essenes to the early Christian activities has not only aroused the interest of hundreds of eminent theologians and biblical authorities, but it has caused one question to be asked by thousands of students of mystical literature: “Why has the history or story of the Essenes been withheld from general knowledge?”
The answer is: Those who knew the story desired to keep the Essenian community shrouded in mystery to protect its work and teachings from being publicly discussed and eventually scoffed at
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 12 —
by those students or professors of orthodox Christianity who have
labored so diligently to make even a greater mystery of Christ and
Christianity.
The Rosicrucian records have always had extensive details of
the activities of the Essenian organization, and no initiate of the
Rosicrucian Order, or no profound student of the ancient mysteries
who became worthy of contact with the ancient records, was ever left
in ignorance regarding the Essenes. Today the veil can be drawn aside
and some of the facts regarding the Essenes be revealed to the world
because of the advancement that has been made in the study of occult
literature and the broad-minded view that is taken by the average
educated student of spiritual and mystical subjects. For this reason I
feel justified in giving the following facts in regard to the Essenes.
In the first place, it probably will be sufficient in this brief outline
of their organization to say that the Essenes were a branch of the
illuminated Great White Lodge, which had its birth in the country
of Egypt during the years preceding Akhnaton, Egyptian pharaoh
and founder of the first monotheistic religion, who supported and
encouraged the existence of a \ to teach the mystic truths of life.
The several mystic schools of Egypt, which were united under one
head constituting the G.W.B., assumed different names in different parts
of the world, in accordance with the language of each country and the
peculiarities of the general religious or spiritual thought of the people.
We find that at Alexandria, the members of the organization there
assumed the name of Essenes. Scientists have speculated considerably
in regard to the origin of this word and its real meaning. So many
unsatisfactory speculations upon its root have been offered in the past
that there is still considerable doubt, in the minds of most authorities,
regarding it.
The word truly comes from the Egyptian word kashai, which means
“secret.” And there is a Jewish word of similar sound, chsahi, meaning
“secret” or “silent”; and this word would naturally be translated into
essaios or “Essene,” denoting “secret” or “mystic.” Even Josephus
found that the Egyptian symbols of light and truth are represented
by the word choshen, which transliterates into the Greek as essen.
Historical references have been found also wherein the priests of the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 13 —
ancient temples of Ephesus bore the name of Essene. A branch of the
organization established by the Greeks translated the word Essene as
being derived from the Syrian word asaya, meaning “physician,” into
the Greek word therapeutes, having the same meaning.
The Rosicrucian records clearly state that the original word was
meant to imply a secret organization, and while most of the members
became physicians and healers, the organization was devoted to many
other humanitarian practices besides the art of healing, and not all of
its members were physicians in any sense.
The spread of the organization into the many lands near Egypt was
slow and natural, in accordance with the awakening consciousness of
the people; and we find that the Essenes became a very definite branch
of the G.W.B. representing the outer activities of that organization,
which was primarily a school of learning and instruction. Thus, for
several centuries before the dawn of the Christian era, the Essenes, as
an active band of workers, maintained two principal centers. One was
in Egypt on the banks of Lake Moeris, where the great Master Moria-
El the Illustrious was born in his first known incarnation, educated,
prepared for his great mission, and established the principle and law
of baptism as a spiritual step in the process of initiation. The other
principal Essenian center was first established in Palestine, at Engaddi,
near the Dead Sea.
Going through the Rosicrucian records pertaining to the Essenes,
I find thousands of notations regarding these two branches, and
from them I have selected the following statements as being the most
interesting and most definite in their connection with the mystical life
of Jesus.
The branch in Palestine had to contend with the despotism of
the rulers of that country and the jealousy of the priesthood. These
conditions forced the Essenes in Palestine to hold themselves in
greater silence and solitude than they had been accustomed to in
Egypt. Before they moved from their small buildings and sacred
enclosure at Engaddi, to the ancient buildings on Mount Carmel, their
principal activity seemed to be the translation of ancient manuscripts
and the preservation of such traditions and records as constituted the
foundation of their teachings.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 14 —
It is recorded that when the time came for them to move from
Engaddi to Mount Carmel, their greatest problem was the secret
movement of these manuscripts and records. Fortunately for us, they
succeeded in preserving the rarest of the manuscripts that came out
of Egypt, and in other ways preserved the ancient, traditional stories
and teachings. It is from these that we derive most of our knowledge
regarding both the Essenes and the G.W.B. A picture of how they
lived, and what they believed and taught, undoubtedly constitutes
a story of intense interest to all modern students of mysticism and
sacred literature.
Every member of the Essenes in Egypt or Palestine, or of the
Therapeutae, as they were called in other lands, had to be a pureblooded
descendant of the Aryan race. This point is very important in
connection with the facts that will be revealed regarding the birth and
life of the Master Jesus. Likewise, they were students of the Avestan
writings and adhered to the principles taught therein, which laid great
stress upon a healthy body and a powerful mind. Before any qualified
Aryan could become an adept in the organization, he or she had to be
prepared in childhood under certain teachers and instructors, raised
with a healthy body, and needed to exercise certain mental powers
under test.
Every adult applicant who was allowed to partake of the daily
meal in the communal building was assigned at the time of initiation
to a definite mission in life, and this mission had to be adhered to
regardless of all obstacles and all temptations, even to the sacrifice
of one’s life. Some chose to be physicians or healers, others artisans,
teachers, missionaries, translators, scribes, and so forth. Whatever
worldly things they possessed at the time of their initiation had to be
donated to the common fund, from which all drew only as was needed.
The simple life they led, free from any indulgence in the pleasures
common to the public, made it unnecessary for them to draw upon
these funds except in rare instances.
Immediately upon initiation, each member adopted a robe of white
composed of one piece of material, and wore sandals only in such
weather or at such times as was absolutely necessary. Their attire was
so distinct or unique that among the populace they were known as the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 15 —
Brothers and Sisters in White Clothing. The term Essene was not popularly
known, and only the learned knew of it. This accounts for the lack of
references to the Essenes in most of the popular histories or writings
of the time.
They lived in well-kept buildings, usually within a sacred or wellprotected
enclosure, in community fashion. All of their affairs were
regulated by a committee or council of judges or councilors, 100
in number, who met once a week to regulate the activities of the
organization and to hear the reports of the workers in the field. All
disagreements, all complaints, all tests and trials were heard by this
council, and one of the regulations indicates that they were always
cautious in expressing opinions of one another or of those outside of
the organization, and they were not critical of the lives or affairs of the
people they were trying to reform or assist. They also adhered strictly
to one of their laws: “Judge not— lest ye be judged also.”
It is possible to set forth here their definite articles of faith as
recorded in ancient, secret writings. While these articles of faith appear
in slightly different words in the various branches of the Essenian
organization, they are undoubtedly based upon the articles of faith
adopted by the G.W.B. at the time of the establishment of the Essenian
organization.
1. God is principle; Gods attributes manifest only through matter
to the outer being. God is not a person, nor does God appear to the
outer person in any form of cloud or glory. (Note the similarity of this
article to the statement of John 4:24: “God is spirit, and those who
worship [God] must worship in spirit and in truth”)
2. The power and glory of God’s dominion neither increases nor
diminishes by human belief or disbelief; and God does not set aside
[God’s] laws to please human beings.
3. The human ego is of God, and at one with God, and is
consequently immortal and everlasting.
4. The forms of man and woman are manifestations of the truth
of God, but God is not manifest in the form of man or woman as a
being.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 16 —
5. The human body is the temple in which the soul resides, and
from the windows of which we view God’s creations and evolutions.
6. At the transition or separation of the soul and body, the soul
enters that secret state where none of the conditions of the earth have
any charms, but the soft breezes and great power of the Holy Ghost
bring comfort and solace to the weary or the anxious who are awaiting
future action. Those who fail, however, to exercise the blessings and
gifts of God, and who follow the dictates of the tempter and of the
false prophets and the ensnaring doctrines of the wicked, remain in
the bosom of the earth until they are freed from the binding powers
of materialism, purified, and assigned to the secret kingdom. (This
explains the ancient, mystical term of earth bound, referring to those
who are still enslaved to material temptations for a time after transition.)
7. To keep holy the one sacred day of the week that the soul may
commune in spirit and ascend to contact with God, resting from all
labors, and discriminating in all actions.
8. To keep silent in disputes, to close the eyes before evil, and to
stop the ears before blasphemers. (This is the original of the ancient
law, “to speak no evil, to see no evil, and to hear no evil.”)
9. To preserve the sacred doctrines from the profane, never speak
of them to those who are not ready or qualified to understand, and
be prepared always to reveal to the world that knowledge which will
enable humans to rise to greater heights.
10. To remain steadfast in all friendships and all communal relations,
even unto death; in all positions of trust never to abuse the power
or privilege granted; and in all human relationships to be kind and
forgiving, even to the enemies of the faith.
Every department of the organization was supervised by stewards,
who were in charge of the material things turned into the general fund
by every member. This general fund was called the poor fund and was
used to relieve the sufferings of the poor in every land. This point
reminds us of the statement in Matthew 19:21: “Sell your possessions,
and give the money to the poor . . . then come, follow me.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 17 —
Hospices were established by the Essenes in various communities
for the care of the sick and the poor, especially during epidemics of
famine or disease. These places were called Bethsaida. We find in this
feature of their work the origin of the hospices and hospitals which
became well known some centuries later. A special staff of workers
who were connected with these places came to be called Hospitalers.
Herein we find the origin of another branch of the community that
later became a more or less separate organization. The Essenes also
established rescue homes in various communities and at the entrance
to most cities had a place called a gate, where strangers or those in
need of something to eat or guidance would be cared for temporarily.
Recent discoveries in Jerusalem have revealed the existence of a gate
known as the Essene Gate.
The Essenes disliked life in cities, and established themselves
in communities of small villages outside of the walls or limits of
practically every city where they existed. In such communities members
had their own little houses and gardens, and those who did not marry
lived in a community house. Marriage was not forbidden among the
Essenes, as is commonly believed, but their ideals regarding marriage
were very high, and only those who were well mated and whose mating
was approved by the higher officials were permitted to marry.
Women were permitted to become associate members of the
organization, and in only a few cases were they allowed to enter even
the early grades of study of the work. This was not because there was
any belief among the Essenes that women were inferior to men in
either spiritual or mental capacity, but because the Essenian branch of
the G.W.B. was strictly an organization of men, to carry on the work
throughout each community. But sisters, mothers, and daughters of
the men in each Essenian community were permitted to be a part of
the community and become associate members. Those of the women
who were not married, and who did not care to marry, often adopted
orphan children as their own, and in this way carried on a form of
humanitarian work for the organization.
In considering their more private affairs, we find that there were not
servants, for servitude was considered unlawful, and each household
had to be cared for by the members of the household. Some of the rules
and regulations recorded in the Rosicrucian records would indicate
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 18 —
that their ideas regarding servants and servitude were quite fanatical
according to our modern point of view. We must remember that in the
days when these rules were adopted, most servants in every wealthy
household, or the servants of a king or potenrate of any kind, were
like slaves, and, of course, among the Essenes every man and woman
was a free being, and slavery or serfdom of any kind was absolutely
prohibited. In each community everyone took part in any work that
pertained to the entire community, and all had a certain amount of
menial work to do. The new initiates had to work in the fields and at
certain times serve at the community tables or in the kitchen and at the
tables of the rescue houses.
As with many other branches of the G.W.B., the Essenes never
entered into contracts or agreements which required oaths or any form
of writing. It became well known about them that their word was equal
to any agreement or contract in writing. They had a definite set of
rules and regulations for their lives, which were well known by all those
with whom they had any dealing, and the highest potentates of the
land knew that the Essenes could not be bound by any oaths, but were
highly responsible when they gave their word in any promise.
Even Josephus, in writing about the Essenes of 146 B.C., stated that
the Essenes were exempted from the necessity of taking the oath of
allegiance to Herod. Most certainly they would make no promise in the
name of God, nor swear to anything in the name of God, for to them,
as with the Jews who inherited the idea from them, the name of God
was to be mentioned only in a sacred manner in their temples, and at all
other times the name of God was unpronounceable. In disagreements
with strangers, the Essenes would pay any price demanded of them
or make sacrifices as requested rather than to enter into arguments or
have any strained relationships. It was for this reason that the Essenes
were thought well of by the Pharisees and other sects in Palestine,
although these other sects severely criticized the religious practices of
the Essenes.
Speaking of oaths, however, I am permitted to give herewith the
official oath which was taken by male initiates and which was the only
oath they ever admitted. It was given upon their own honor, at the time
of entering the final degree of initiation, or what we would call the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 19 —
fourth degree of their advancement into the organization. The oath
is as follows:
I promise herewith, in the presence of my elders, and the
Brothers of the Order, ever to exercise true humbleness before
God and manifest justice toward all men; to do no harm, either
of my own volition or at the command of others, to any living
creature; always to abhor wickedness, and assist in righteousness
and justice; to show fidelity to all men, particularly to those who
may be my superiors in counsel; and when placed in authority, I
shall never abuse the privileges or power temporarily given unto
me, nor attempt to belittle others by a worldly display of my mental
or physical prowess; truth shall ever have my adoration and I shall
shun those who find pleasure in falsehood; I will keep my hands
clean from theft, and keep my soul free from the contamination of
worldly gain; my passions I will restrain, and never indulge in anger
nor any outward display of unkind emotions; I shall never reveal
the secret doctrines of our brotherhood, even at the hazard of life,
except to those who are worthy of them; I shall never communicate
the doctrines in any form, but the one form in which received; I shall
not add to nor subtract from the teachings, but shall ever attempt to
preserve them in their pristine purity, and will defend the integrity
of the books and records of our order, the names of the masters,
legislators, and my elders.
After the initiate had reached what we might call the fourth degree
and had taken the foregoing obligation, he was admitted to the
common table to partake of the one great symbolical meal of the day,
at which time meditation and contemplation, as well as discussion of
the problems of the work, formed part of the period.
It is interesting to note that all the food used by the Essenes was
prepared according to the rules and regulations stated in the old
documents, in a scientific but simple manner, and while vegetables and
especially many forms of raw foods were used, it is not true that all
flesh foods were forbidden. There was never any form of over-eating
or banqueting, and certainly the rules of moderation in all things
pertained to eating and drinking as well; hence there was no gluttony
nor intoxication.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 20 —
The Essenes seldom took part in public discussions and never
participated in discussions of religion or politics. They were most often
silent when others spoke, and silence seemed to be their motto. They
were well trained in the use of the voice and in making incantations,
and knew the value of vowel sounds to such a degree that by training
they became very soft spoken, even in ordinary conversation. Because
of this they were often known as the soft-spoken ones.
It is but natural that the Essenes would have developed not only
magnetic personalities, accompanied by clean bodies, clean raiment,
and clean habits, but they developed such beautiful auras that on many
occasions these auras became visible to the profane. This especially
mystified the Jews who were unfamiliar with the development of a
mystical nature, even though their own religion and traditions contained
many wonderful mystical laws which they failed to put into practical
application.
It was customary for all Essenes to wash their hands and feet upon
entering their own homes or the homes of anyone else, and to cleanse
their hands and feet before any ceremony, and before each daily prayer.
In their individual homes the Essenes spent much time before the
altar in their sanctums, or in the study of the rare manuscripts and
books which were circulated among them according to their degree
of advancement. They were particularly well versed in astrology,
elementary astronomy, natural history, geometry, elementary chemistry
and alchemy, comparative religions, mysticism, and natural law.
Those who were the physicians in the organization were evidently
a curiosity to the peoples of Palestine who were accustomed to the
healing methods of that land, which included the exercising of charms,
incantations in high-pitched voices, the reciting of weird formulas, the
striking of crude musical instruments, and the use of strong drugs.
The Essenes spoke softly to their patients and used certain vowel
sounds without any evidence of a formula. They often performed the
greatest cures by the simple laying on of hands or by instructing the
patient to retire to the silence of his home and sleep while the cure was
conducted in a psychic manner.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 21 —
All Essenes promised to educate their children in the teachings and
principles which constituted the foundation of the Essenian belief.
They raised each child within the scope of the organization until the
child’s twelfth year, when it was accepted on probation, which lasted
until the twenty-first year, at which time the males were admitted to
the first degree, and generally reached the fourth degree about the
thirtieth year. The females were admitted on their twenty-first birthday
to associate membership, and remained in that the rest of their lives if
they proved worthy by the manner of their living.
Only an occasional Essene was permitted to preach to the public or
perform public miracles, and then never as a matter of demonstration,
but solely as a matter of service. Those in the organization who had
lived the greatest number of incarnations, and were therefore the
most highly evolved, were selected as their leaders, and, from among
these, one was selected during each cycle to go out into the world and
organize the work in a new land.
The Essenes looked forward to the coming of a great Savior who
would be born within the fold of their organization and who would
be a reincarnation of the greatest of their past leaders. Through
their highly evolved knowledge and intimate psychic contact with the
Cosmic, they were well informed of coming events, and the Essenian
literature and the literature of many countries contain references to
the prophets among the Essenes. Manahem was one of their prophets
who became famous through the prophecy that Herod would reign.
There seemed to be a regulation or an unwritten law among the
Essenes that none of their members should be engaged in a daily
task that was destructive, but always constructive. Therefore we find
that the list of prominent Essenes included weavers, carpenters, vine
planters, gardeners, merchants, and those contributing to the good and
welfare of the public. There never were any in the organization who
were armorers, slaughterers of cattle, nor engaged in any practice or
business that destroyed the least living thing.
It must be very apparent to my readers that the Essenes would
appear to have been one of the sects of Palestine and would have
been, therefore, classified as such by the Jews and by the governmental
authorities. For this reason we often read in newly discovered records
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 22 —
a reference to the Essenes as one of the sects in Palestine. It would be
natural for the Jews to consider the Essenes as a religious organization,
instead of a communal or mystical one, and certainly an organization
opposed to the Jewish doctrines and practices. Under these conditions
it would be natural for the Essenes to establish their homes in certain
communities where others of the same organization lived and where
they could have that form of neighborly companionship which
strengthened their interests.
These Essenes were not Jews by birth, by blood, or by religion,
and were often referred to as Gentiles, and we find them classified as
Gentiles in many of the sacred writings, even in the Christian Bible.
Editor’s Note: Archaeological discoveries made in 1946— some 17
years after this chapter was written—go far to enlarge our knowledge of
the Essenes and to confirm the statements made here concerning them.
Read the article by Edmund Wilson in the May 14, 1955, issue of the
magazine The New Yorker, as well as his book Scrolls from the Dead
Sea, published by Oxford University Press, New York and Toronto
(1955).
Editor’s Note: Corroborative evidence of the cultural activities of
the Essenes is shown in a report appearing in the New York Times
of April 2, 1953. This concerns the discovery of a series of important
manuscripts on the shore of the Dead Sea, 25 miles east of Jerusalem.
We quote: “The archaeologist (G. Lankester Harding, Director of
Antiquities, in Jordan) said the scrolls had been found several months
ago in a cave near the ruins of a settlement now known as Khirbet
Qumran. He added that it was fairly certain that the settlement was the
home of the Essenes about 1,900 years ago and that the scrolls were
from their library, and probably were hidden in caves for safe keeping.”
This new find included hitherto unknown Apocrypha and “descriptions
of the conduct and organization of the Essenes, who lived in Palestine
from the second century B.C. to the second century A.D. The Essenes
were distinguished by their strict asceticism and such characteristics as
the community of property, the practice of charity, and the pursuit of
virtue.”
— 23 —
Chapter 2
THE NEIGHBORS OF JESUS
TO FURTHER UNDERSTAND the greatness of the advent of the Master Jesus, one should know something of the people and the conditions of the country in which he was born, and with which he had to contend at the beginning of his mission.
In the first place, Palestine was not one nation of one language, with interests that held one people in common bonds, but a land of many nations, of many languages, and many diverse interests. It was a country of mixed and hostile peoples, whose interests were not only diverse, but so divided and so opposed that peace and harmony among them was impossible. Those of the Jewish faith were not all Hebrews, and those who were Hebrews were such through the beginning of a new race that had its origin at the time of the Exodus out of Egypt. Among these Hebrews were many in whose veins was Aryan blood by intermarriage; therefore, there were various castes. Hence among the Hebrews, as among those of the Jewish faith, there were those who would not recognize others in the same faith, and who believed that God had ordained the distinctions which they established.
In the midst of these people there were the heathens, whose temples were rapidly rising, and whose rites and customs were becoming prevalent. To the northeast there were the nomads, wild people living without restraint or regulation, but the vast majority of the people throughout the northeast were Syrians, Greeks, and heathens. To the east and to the west of Palestine, the Egyptian, Phoenician, and the Grecian rites contended for mastery, and in the very heart of Palestine itself the Greek language was dominant and the Grecian rites prevailed.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 24 —
The educated classes throughout Palestine spoke Greek. The
language of the tribes of Israel had undergone a great change, and
the ancient Hebrew language, as it was called, had given place to the
Aramaean dialect, except in the academies and theological schools.
In the northern section, known as Upper Galilee, lived people who
were known as Gentiles. Tiberius itself was wholly non-Jewish. Gaza
had its own deity. Joppa was influenced by a heathen religion, according
to the Jews. Caesarea was essentially a heathen city and, to the Jews,
was the symbol of Rome—the Rome of Edom—and was therefore to
be destroyed; for Caesarea and Jerusalem, from the viewpoint of the
Jews, could never exist at the same time.
The rabbis of the Jewish religion considered that the only real and
true land of Israel was that portion immediately south of Antioch. Yet
strange to say, it was here that the first Gentile church was organized
and that we find the first Christian disciples.
Palestine, and especially Jerusalem, was most certainly a heathen
district just before the coming of the Master Jesus. While it is true
that the Jewish religion was well established, it most certainly did not
include the multitudes, and it did not include all of the highest rank and
power. Judaism itself was quite a problem at this time. The Pharisees
and Sadducees were the two other largest sects, if we may be permitted
to consider the Essenes as a sect from the Jewish point of view; but
the former two held opposite principles and hated each other, while
the Essenes, of course, could not be a part of either of them.
There was one common emotion which bound all these people of
Palestine in one universal feeling. The high and the low, the learned
and the unlearned, the rich and the poor, the heathen, the Jew, the
common person or the ruling ones, united in their intense dislike for
the Gentiles.
In the financial world the Hebrews represented the wealth and
influence of the nations; for all money transactions and great trade
dealings were in their hands. Merchandise from the Far East came
through Palestine by means of Arab caravans and through the
Phoenician ports, where fleets of ships owned by the Jews and
operated by Gentile sailors were ever ready to convey the wares to
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 25 —
other parts of the world. The Jews as traders and bankers were keenly
alive to the value of this situation, and through their financial influence
wielded a considerable power in the political world also. They were
able to obtain secrets of state and to secure such positions in the civil
and military service of the other Gentile nations as permitted them to
manipulate the intricacies of diplomacy so as to further the interests
of the Hebrews.
It must be remembered that the orthodox Jews or Hebrews were
intensely Hebraic. To their own they were very hospitable, a trait
which they considered a great virtue, and to strangers, especially to the
Gentiles, they manifested the very opposite in all actions.
The people living in Jerusalem, which was the most advanced
habitation in Palestine, had special agents in, and corresponded with, the
important parts of the world; and letters were carried from Jerusalem
to many other cities by messengers and by peddlers. The wealthy
Jews gave great fortunes for the support and defense of the Jewish
faith, and such donations were always looked upon as investments
that would bring great returns. The Hebrews had their own rulers in
most cities and were allowed to have the same status as the Romans,
or the rights of Asiatic citizens, and the special privileges which they
demanded because of having been instructed by their God to enjoy
such privileges as God’s chosen people. Having the status of Romans
entitled them to a civil government of their own, independent of the
rule of the tribunals in the cities in which they lived. They enjoyed
such unlimited religious liberties and exacted such religious privileges
as they denied to natives in their own lands who were not of their faith.
The ruling class of the Hebrews made themselves obnoxious to the
other citizens in each section of the land by closing their stores on the
sabbath and going about idly in gorgeous attire, with marked display
of contempt and abhorrence of everything around them. It was their
secret desire to convert to Judaism the relatives of all those who
wielded power, influence, and wealth, because through such converts
they would promote the interests of Israel, and it was freely predicted
that the ultimate aim of the proselyting was to wipe the Gentiles out
of Palestine.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 26 —
In the synagogues, which represented the meeting places of the
ruling class of the Hebrews, the separation of the classes was strictly
observed, and the women were considered as unprepared for a position
in the church. We see the attitude toward women in many passages
of the Jewish liturgy used in the synagogues, where thanksgiving is
expressed in the following words: “Blessed art thou, Lord and God,
that thou hast not made me a woman.” Women were considered as
having no souls and no degree of spirituality that could be developed,
and they were therefore incapable of ever becoming angelic. It is
always interesting to those of the Western world today in traveling
through the Oriental countries to find that all the statues of angels are
of the masculine sex. This idea of a soulless woman is retained in all
Latin languages; for we find that word angel is always of the masculine
sex. No rabbi would permit himself to be closeted with a woman in
religious discussion, nor to deal with a woman in regard to spiritual
matters.
Secretly, or silently, the Jews or the orthodox of Israel resented the
fact that the scepter of power had been taken away from Judea and the
chosen people of God subjected to the government of Rome. This
was a humiliation which the Jews hoped to see undone. Israel hoped
that the day would come when its people would rise in power and
when their “King of Glory” would appear and reestablish the power
and kingdom of Israel again.
And thus Israel waited. In silence and with suppressed emotion, the
faithful anticipated the coming of the great day.
In my recent journey through Egypt, I felt the same suppressed
emotion on the part of the Egyptians. As they moved about in silence
with cold, emotionless expressions on their faces, and refrained from
speaking of the days that were, and the days that would come, one could
sense that inwardly there was a great fire burning which wanted only
the signal to burst into a conflagration that would sweep throughout
the whole country. The Egyptians, too, are waiting now for the day
to come when the great power and illumination that resides within
their traditions and their secret archives will make them the potent
rulers of their land. Just as one could easily sense the possibility of a
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 27 —
great conflagration in that land, so one may understand and appreciate
the condition that existed in Palestine at the time of the birth of the
Master Jesus. Uneasiness had seized the people; for they had felt the
yoke upon their necks and they realized that they were being held in
bondage and could stand it but a short time longer.
In a social way, vice and degrading practices had become popular with
the masses, and the moral standard was akin to licentiousness. Intrigue
and crime were found even in the courts of law. The governing power
was divided between the two classes, the nobility and the priesthood.
The nobility sought only gratification of the baser senses, trying to
keep within the law only as far as it permitted them to gain their selfish
ends. Most of them professed to be of the sect of Sadducees. On the
other hand, the priestly element, or the Pharisees, known as the “pure,
separate ones,” were constantly warring in their determined effort to
secure power and force strict adherence to the letter of their laws. The
Sadducees were their enemies, especially when the latter were favored
in any way with rank or position.
The masses were downtrodden and held in ignorance of the true
conditions, but they believed that there was a possibility of rising
above their environment through the coming of a great leader. It is
no wonder that these persons, mostly unlearned and inexperienced in
the things of life, united with any movement which promised them
freedom from their bondage or an opportunity to rise to heights which
they sensed in their dream world. Thus, in many ways these uncultured
and uneducated ones followed leaders and principles which left them
in serious situations and sorely disappointed. It was the great hope that
the coming of the expected Messiah would change all of the sorrowful
conditions and bring about a solidification and unification of the
people of Israel. How this was to come about, no one knew; and only
the pretenders who headed the false movements attempted to explain.
The House of David, out of which the true leader of the people of
Israel should come, had long since passed into the hands of strangers.
The high priesthood, out of which a great Messiah might come, was
Jewish only by profession, being politically Roman and Greek in culture,
and by birth anything but of the great House of David. Therefore, the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 28 —
great Deliverer who would lead them out of bondage as Moses had
done, could not come through the lineage of those who were presently
at the head of the nation, nor could this person come through those
who were of the priesthood.
One phrase remained in the consciousness of the people: “From
among my [brothers and sisters] I shall raise one who shall guide my
people!”
— 29 —
Chapter 3
THE PARENTS OF JESUS
NO PROPER CONSIDERATION can be given to the birth and childhood of Jesus without first becoming acquainted with the parents of Jesus and their relationship to the mystical facts involved. Therefore, let me state the first important facts, as proved by our records, and then submit the evidence pertaining thereto.
Jesus was born of Gentile parents through whose veins flowed Aryan blood, and in whose hearts and minds had been implanted the teachings of the Essenes, as well as the more secret teachings of the G.W.B. This is the simple, definite statement found throughout the Rosicrucian records.
In the Christian Bible, in the Talmud, and in many reliable works, we find verification of these statements. The parents of Jesus lived in Galilee. There is no possible dispute on this point, and they were therefore Galileans in the full meaning of the term. So our first consideration should be of Galilee and the Galileans.
In Matthew 4:15, we read: “Galilee of the Gentiles.” Strange as it may seem, the average Bible student gives little thought to this expression and loses sight of its very important significance. Jesus himself was called the Galilean. For this reason, we must look upon Jesus as having been classified by his own people, or by the people of Palestine at least, as one who was different from them. This warrants us in investigating the real situation and discovering why the Galileans were Gentiles, and why Gentiles lived in Galilee.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 30 —
In I Maccabees 5:15, we read that messengers from Galilee, with torn
clothing and in great anguish, came to Judas Maccabaeus and reported
that “the people of Ptolemais and Tyre and Sidon, and all Galilee of
the Gentiles, had gathered together against them to ‘annihilate us.’”
And Judas told Simon, his brother, to choose certain men to go to
Galilee and rescue the Jews who were in Galilee, that they might not
be persecuted by the Gentiles. Simon took 3,000 men into Galilee,
where he fought many battles with the “heathens,” and the Jews living
in Galilee with their wives and children were brought safely into Judea.
Here we see at once an intimation of the conditions that existed
in part of Palestine, and how the orthodox Jews looked upon the
Galileans as being not only Gentiles, and of a different religion and
race, but as enemies to their best interests.
The transfer of the Jews living in Galilee referred to above was
made in 164 B.C. At about the same time, Judas Maccabaeus rescued
his brothers who lived among the “heathens” in the north of the
country (and east of the Jordan) and brought them all to Jerusalem.
According to this account and many others, there were Jews in Galilee
long after 164 B.C. Therefore, Galilee continued as a nation of Gentiles
or “heathens” until the year 103 B.C., when Aristobulus, grandson of
Simon, and first king of the Jews (Maccabees), forced all those living
in Galilee to adopt circumcision and the Mosaic law.
We will see by this that the Gentiles living in Galilee, which included
the parents of Jesus, were Aryans by blood, Gentiles by natural
religious classification, mystics by philosophical thought, and Jews
by forced adoption. In other words, the Gentiles of Galilee after 103
B.C. were forced to adopt circumcision and respect the Mosaic law,
and in accordance with this law all children at a certain age had to
accept the Jewish faith in a formal way by appearing at the synagogue
for probationary admission to the church. If this combination of
circumstances and conditions will be kept in mind by my readers, it will
enable them to understand the many strange statements that appear in
sacred literature.
In the cuneiform inscriptions of Tiglath-Pileser, there is reference
to the conquest of Galilee, but it is generally misunderstood, as are
many of the other statements regarding Galilee, because few know
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 31 —
that Galilee is also referred to as the land of Hamath. The same name,
Hamath, is used in the Old Testament, but it seems that modern
students of the ancient writings did not recognize in this particular
word the name of the ancient capital of Galilee. However, let it be
known now that Hamath is the famous hot springs, half an hour south
of Tiberius, on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee.
Often in the Old Testament one may read of the “entrance to
Hamath” and it always refers to parts of the northern boundary
of Palestine. It is the Wady Alhammans, near Magdala, three miles
northwest of Tiberius, where Mary Magdalene was born. In other
parts of the Bible we read that the king of Hamath, who sent his
son to salute David, was a Galilean; Solomons storehouse or granaries
which he built in Hamath were situated near the Sea of Galilee.
The true spelling of the name is Hammoth, or Hammath, the
Assyrian form being Hammati, which means “hot springs.” Many
other quotations could be used to show that Hamath was in Galilee.
And we will find by other references that a great many Assyrians were
sent to Hamath as colonists, and further reference reveals that the
Assyrians were all Aryans. Even Sargon II tells how he deported the
Median chief with kinsmen to Hamath.
It was because of this settlement of Aryans in the vicinity of Galilee,
and the resulting race of Aryans in that community, that the Aryans
of Egypt who were members of the G.W.B. and of the Essenian
organization directed their people to go to northern Palestine, and
live on the shores of Galilee and associate with people of their own
race. There are also many historical notations in Egyptian records, and
especially in the ancient records of the G.W.B., to show that there was
close communion and intercourse between the Aryans of Galilee and
the Aryans of Egypt.
Our records also show that at the time of the birth of Jesus, the
Galileans spoke a language which was not Hebrew. The fact has been
known among students of sacred literature for several centuries that
the Master Jesus spoke another language besides Hebrew, and there
are indications that he spoke several tongues. These indications have
greatly puzzled the students of sacred literature, and much speculation
has existed among authorities in regard to this matter.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 32 —
The common agreement among these authorities is that Jesus
presented most of his parables and teachings to the populace in the
Aramaic language, and they also believe that he used some other
language that was not Hebrew. Our records clearly show that he
used Greek and Aramaic in his general discourses and conversations,
and used Hebrew only when he was speaking to those who did not
understand the other languages. Most of his beautifully poetic parables
and discourses were in either the Aramaic or the Greek language. We
will discuss, later, the manner in which Jesus became educated in the
Greek language. We will find the use of these foreign phrases in the
words of Jesus, in such verses of the Bible as Mark 5:41, Mark 7:34,
Mark 14:36, and in many other places.
The Galilean dialect was a constant source of jest for the Jews. Peter
was also of Galilee and of the Gentile race, and we find in Matthew
26:73 that some said to Peter: “Certainly you are also one of them, for
your accent betrays you.” There are many historical notes that show
that the Jews recognized the Galileans by the fact that these Gentiles
could not distinguish the various Semitic gutturals.
The foregoing are but a few of the hundreds of facts which might
be submitted to show that the parents of Jesus were Gentiles and
of a different tongue than the Jews. This makes us question at once
the genealogy which is so exhaustively presented in the Bible in an
attempt to show that Jesus was a descendant of the House of David.
This genealogy in the Bible is presented in two places by two different
authors, and the generations in each table do not agree. But aside from
this discrepancy, the genealogy is only an attempt on the part of later
admirers and followers of Jesus to make it appear that he was of the
House of David, as hoped and prayed for by the Jews.
It must be borne in mind that at no time during his lifetime did Jesus
himself refer to his ancestors or forebears, or intimate to the Jews that
he was the Messiah of the House of David whom they had anticipated.
And we find nothing in any historical records of a contemporary
nature, or among the authentic Jewish records, to show that during the
lifetime of Jesus, or even during the first 100 or more years after his
time, that the Jews or anyone else believed that he was of the House of
David. Just when the genealogy attempting to show such a connection
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 33 —
was prepared and introduced in the sacred writings is not known, but
it is most certainly a very late addition to the writings.
Now we must deal with another phase of the history of the parents,
and of Jesus himself. In much of the Christian literature Jesus is referred
to as the Nazarene, and it is commonly believed that this means to
indicate that Jesus was born, or spent most of his lifetime, in Nazareth.
It is strange how students of biblical literature, and especially those
who have written so exhaustively on the life of Jesus, and who have
presented in their teachings and preachments the picturesque details
of his life, have never given proper thought to the tide Nazarene, or
investigated its real meaning. It is assumed by all of these authorities,
writers, and teachers, that if Jesus was a Nazarene, he must have been
of the city called Nazareth, and since he and his parents lived in Galilee,
the city of Nazareth must have been in that locality. On the basis of
such reasoning, it is generally proclaimed that Nazareth was the home
town of the parents of Jesus, and that Nazareth in Galilee was the
place where Jesus spent his childhood.
I have been just recently in Nazareth and made exhaustive
inquiries for the purpose of verifying the statements contained in the
Rosicrucian records. Probably most of my readers will be surprised to
learn that at the time Jesus was born there was no city or town in the
whole of Galilee known as Nazareth, and that the city in Galilee which
now bears that name is not only a city of more recent years, but was
named and came into existence because of the demand on the part
of investigators to find some place that would answer to the name of
Nazareth in Galilee.
First of all, we must make plain that the title Nazarene did not imply
that the person who bore that title was of a city called Nazareth.
Rather, the title was given by the Jews to those strange people outside
of their own religion who seemed to belong to some secret sect or cult
that had existed in northern Palestine for many centuries. We find in
the Christian Bible that even John the Baptist was called the Nazarene.
We also find many other references to persons who were known as
Nazarenes. In Acts 24:5, we find some man being condemned as a
mover of sedition among the Jews throughout the world and being
called a “ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.” Whenever the Jews
came in contact with one in their country who had a different religion,
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 34 —
and especially a mystical understanding of the things of life, and who
was living in accordance with some code of philosophical or moral
ethics that was different from those of the Jews, he or she was called a
Nazarene for the want of a better name.
There was a definite sect called the Nazarenes, and we find them
referred to in the Jewish records as a sect of primitive Christians, or
in other words, those who were essentially prepared for and ready to
accept the Christian doctrines. In fact, the Jewish encyclopedias and
authorities seem to agree that the term Nazarene embraced all those
Christians who had originally been both Jews, and who neither would
nor could give up their original mode of life, but who attempted to
adjust the new doctrines with the old. The Jewish encyclopedias also
state that it is quite evident that the Nazarenes and the Essenes had
many characteristics in common and were therefore of a mystical
tendency. In fact, the Essenes and the Nazarenes were considered
heretics by the learned Jews, but there is this difference or distinction
in the use of the two terms: the Essenes were not as well known to
the populace of Palestine as were the Nazarenes, and seldom was
someone called an Essene unless the person was well informed and
knew the difference between the Essenes and the Nazarenes; whereas
many Essenes and even those of other sects who lived an atypical life
or who did not accept the Jewish religion were called Nazarenes.
Jerome, the famous biblical authority, refers to the fact that in his
day there still existed among the Jews, in all the synagogues of the
East, a heresy condemned by the Pharisees, and the followers of it
were called Nazarenes. He said that they believed that Christ, the Son
of God, was born of the Virgin Mary, and they held Christ to be the
one who suffered under Pontius Pilate and ascended to heaven. “But,”
said Jerome, “while they pretended to be both Jewish and Christian,
they were neither.”
Turning to the highest Roman Catholic authorities, we find that the
title Nazarene, as applied to Christ, occurs only once in the Douai version
of the Bible, and this authority states that the term Jesus Nazarenus
is uniformly translated “Jesus of Nazareth,” but this is a mistake in
translation, for it should read “Jesus the Nazarene.” Nowhere in the Old
Testament do we find the word Nazareth as referring to a city existing
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 35 —
anywhere in Palestine, but we do find in the New Testament references
to Jesus returning to a city called Nazareth. These references are a
result of translating the phrase, “Jesus returning to the Nazarenes”
to read, “Jesus returning to Nazareth.” The interesting point here is
emphasized by the Roman Catholic authorities, for they show that
whereas Jesus was commonly referred to as the Nazarene, he was not
of that sect at all.
Taking the Jewish and Roman Catholic records together, and
comparing them with the information contained in our own records,
we find that the Nazarenes constituted a sect of Jews who, while
attempting to adhere to the ancient Jewish teachings, did believe in
the coming of a Messiah who would be born in an unusual manner
and who would become the Savior of their race. After the ministry of
Jesus began, these Nazarenes accepted Jesus as the Messiah and even
accepted the doctrines he taught while still trying to adhere to many
of the fundamentals of their Jewish religion. The Jewish records state
that the Nazarenes rejected Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, and that
some of the Nazarenes exalted Jesus only as a just person.
There was another term for such heretics among the Jews, and this
was Nazarite. According to the Jewish authorities, the term was applied
to those who lived apart or separate from the Jewish race, because of
some distinctive religious, moral, or ethical belief. The Jewish records
state that such persons were often those who would not take wine or
drink anything made from grapes, or those who would not cut a hair
of their heads, or who would not touch the dead during any funeral
ceremony.
These same records state that the history or origin of Nazariteship in
ancient Israel is obscure. They state that Samson was a Nazarite, as was
his mother, and that Samuel’s mother promised to dedicate him to the
sect of Nazarites. The Jewish records state also that it was common
for parents to dedicate their minor children to the Nazarite sect, and
they distinctly say that there are references to the fact that Jesus was
said to have been dedicated to the Nazarites while still in the womb.
The Jewish records say that Luke 1:15 refers to this dedication. Helena,
the Queen, and Miryam of Palmyra are mentioned as Nazarites in the
Jewish records, and many other persons famous in sacred literature
were known to be Nazarites.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 36 —
That the terms Nazarite and Nazarene had naught to do with a city
or town called Nazareth is plainly indicated by many historical records.
We have said that the present town of Nazareth in Galilee received
its name because a place had to be found that would fit the common
understanding in regard to the village in which the parents of Jesus
lived and where he spent his boyhood. During the first few centuries
after Christ, when the Christian doctrines were in the making and the
founders of the Roman Catholic Church and religious students in
general were searching for every historical site connected with the life
of Jesus, each spot, place, and incident in the career of this great person
was eagerly tabulated and glorified. My recent visit through Palestine
made plain to me that this desire to find historical, sacred sites and
glorify them has not ended and will probably continue for hundreds
of years. The absurdity of most of this becomes apparent when even
the casual tourist discovers that three, four, and five different places
are pointed out as being the spot where some particular incident in the
life of Jesus occurred.
In searching for a place that would answer to the name of Nazareth
in Galilee, great difficulty was experienced, since no such city was
mentioned in the Old Testament, and none of the ancient maps of the
time of Christ revealed such a site. A very small settlement, however,
called En Nasira was found far from the Sea of Galilee, and this was
immediately renamed Nazareth and associated with the early life of
the child Jesus. This discovery of the town of En Nasira was made in
the third century after Christ, and since then has been known as the town
of Nazareth, but even today it is lacking in any of the evidences which
would warrant the use of that name.
In Mark 6:1,2, the statements are made that Jesus went back to his
own country and his disciples followed him, and when the sabbath day
was come, he began to teach in the synagogue. In the fourth verse of
that chapter, Jesus referred to the fact that he was a prophet in his own
country, among his own kin, and in his own house. These statements
have been taken to refer to Nazareth, the town in which many biblical
students believe Jesus was born and in which he spent his childhood.
Now, if Jesus did return to his home town and did preach in a
synagogue to great multitudes, it could not have been at En Nasira, or
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 37 —
the so-called town of Nazareth; for even in the second and third centuries
after the birth of Jesus, En Nasira or Nazareth had no synagogue and
was not large enough to have any building in which multitudes could
have listened to Jesus, nor were there multitudes in that vicinity to hear
him. So the references in Mark to his hometown could not refer to En
Nasira. En Nasira was only a settlement around a spring which was
at that time called the “Spring of the Guard House,” but I find that
now in recent years it has been changed and is called “St. Mary’s Well.”
This change of name and the giving of a religious significance to some
unimportant site in Palestine is typical of the changes that are being
rapidly made in that country for the benefit of tourists.
Turning to the old Jewish records, we find these state that only in the
books of the New Testament, written long after the lifetime of Jesus, is
the town of Nazareth mentioned as a village in Galilee, and that such a
place is not mentioned in the Old Testament, in the historical writings
of Josephus, nor in the Talmud. During the lifetime of Jesus, the town
of Joppa was the important city in the locality of Galilee. It was the one
which attracted all tourists and is referred to most often in historical
writings.
In the Roman Catholic records and in their encyclopedias, we find
that the town of En Nasira was known as a strictly Jewish village up to
the time of Constantine and is referred to as one being inhabited wholly
by Jews. Therefore, this little village surrounding a well could not have
been the center of the Gentile population of Galilee. At the present
time, there is a small church or chapel in Nazareth which I visited, and
it is supposed to stand above the grotto where Mary and Joseph lived at
the time that the archangel announced to Mary the forthcoming birth
of the incarnation of the Logos.
All of the foregoing facts point out very clearly that Mary and Joseph
and the child born to them were considered, along with many others
in their locality, as Nazarenes, Nazarites, or people of a non-Jewish
sect. And the many other references to this sect clearly show that it
was one which held such religious and mystical views as permitted
the acceptance of the fundamentals of the Christian doctrine. Taking
this into consideration, we have at once an interesting picture of the
conditions existing in and around Palestine just prior to the Christian
era.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 38 —
We have, first of all, a large number of men and women, even
children, who were either Jewish by birth, Gentile by birth, or of various
races and bloods, but who had refused to adopt wholly or completely
the Mosaic law and were Jewish only because the laws of the land
forced them to adopt circumcision, to appear in the synagogue when
twelve years of age, and to be enrolled as Jews. Yet these persons were
mystically inclined in their beliefs and followed the Jewish teachings
only so far as they revealed God and God’s laws and served them in
their study of divine principles. They were prepared by some school
or some system which made them ready to accept the higher mystical
teachings as they were revealed from time to time by the progressive
minds or by the teachings of avatars.
On the other hand, there was the one definite organization of mystics
known as the Essenes, which conducted many forms of humanitarian
activities, including hospices, rescue homes, and places for the care of
the poor and needy. The Essenes had their northern center in Galilee,
among the Aryans, because they had been directed to this locality by
the center of their organization in Egypt, known as the G.W.B. The
Essenes were not popularly known, were quiet and unostentatious in
their activities, and were distinguished by the populace only by their
white raiment. The Nazarites, the Nazarenes, and the Essenes mingled
freely and undoubtedly sought to carry on their independent activities
without interference one with the other, although they unquestionably
had many ideals and purposes in common. But the Nazarites and
Nazarenes were popularly recognized and known to the populace,
and for this reason all who did not accept the Jewish faith, or who
were heretical in their Jewish beliefs, were classified as Nazarenes and
Nazarites, not as Essenes.
In and around the shores of the Sea of Galilee lived these people—
mostly Gentiles of Aryan blood of the several sects, Nazarenes,
Nazarites, and Essenes. They, too, were looking for the coming of
the great Master, the great Avatar, the great Messiah, who would not
only redeem Palestine but the whole world, and who would bring
contentment to Israel and all peoples. These mystics contemplated,
with true understanding, the reincarnation of one of their own great
masters. We must bear in mind that the belief in reincarnation was not
only an established belief among these mystics, who were classified
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 39 —
as heretics and as Gentiles, but also among the most orthodox of the
Jewish people at that time. This accounts for the many references in
sacred literature, and even in the Christian Bible, to a great leader,
a great teacher, as having been someone else at some other time; for they
believed that the greatest among them were great because of previous
preparation, previous existence, and previous attainments. Naturally
they looked for the new great master, the new redeemer of the world,
to come out of the past in a new body and as a well prepared individual
of high attainments.
The Rosicrucian records show that not only did each of the homes
of these Essenes and Nazarenes and Nazarites have a sanctum, in
which daily prayers and solemn meditations were held, but many
hours of each day and evening were given to mystical practices and
the development of a spiritual power within their beings. This made
possible the many miracles they performed and the great work which
they did among the poor and needy.
They were well advanced in the understanding of most of the
mystical laws which the Rosicrucians and other mystics of the world
today study and practice, and they knew the potentialities of certain
spiritual laws when applied specifically for any definite purpose. To
them, such miracles as incarnations of a highly divine nature, and
the coming of a great leader into their midst, through uncontaminated
material laws, were not impossible, nor improbable, and they lived a
life typical of that which the mystics of today believe is lived by the
masters in Tibet and in parts of India and Egypt.
Joseph was not only a devout Essene, and a carpenter by trade, in
keeping with the rules of the organization, but Mary, his wife, was an
associate member of the organization. Yet both of them had been
forced to accept the Jewish religion and had identified themselves in
a purely formal way with the faith in accordance with the law of the
land.
With these facts in mind, let us now approach the interesting subject
of the birth of Jesus.
— 40 —
Chapter 4
THE VIRGIN BIRTH OF AVATARS
THIS INCIDENT IN the life of avatars is one that is very difficult to approach and more difficult to present to those who have not attained that high degree of mystical understanding and awakening which naturally would bring to the student a spiritual understanding of the conception and birth of avatars.
I realize fully that the standard Christian story of the virgin birth of Jesus is one that is not accepted by those who reject any of the Christian doctrines. In fact, the authorized Christian version of the virgin birth is a very difficult one for the uninitiated and undeveloped mystic to comprehend, and it certainly appears to be an impossible story to those who are of an analytical mind and who do not comprehend any of the mystical laws and principles as taught by the ancient masters.
Perhaps I will do better than others who have attempted, in the past, to reduce the mystical phase of the birth of Jesus to a semi-mystical presentation, and perhaps I may fail altogether. I am not limited by any creeds or dogmas which require that I shall adhere to a standardized version; and if I fail to make my reader comprehend, or perhaps apprehend, the real mystery of the virgin birth, it will be because I have been limited solely by an inadequate vocabulary to express in general terms that which every mystic understands inwardly, and because of the inability of some of my readers to read between the lines of my statements and realize what I cannot reduce to such crude things as printed words.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 41 —
First of all, it should be understood by those who approach
this great mystery with an open and unbiased mind, that Jesus was
not the first great Master, Avatar, or Son of God to be “born of a
virgin.” The authorized Christian version of the virgin birth of Jesus
presents the story as though it were unique and exclusively a Christian
manifestation. If nowhere else in the history of God’s messengers
on earth, or the working out of God’s plans for the redemption of
humans in all ages and cycles, there had ever been a similar incident
or a similar manifestation of the great mystic powers of the universe,
operating as an unusual manifestation of God’s omnipotent ways, then
the mystery of the conception and birth of this great person would be
more difficult to explain and to comprehend.
To the mystics of the Orient in all lands and of all ages, the great
mystery of the virgin and spiritual birth of a Son of God is accepted
not only as a possibility but as a fact natural to the life of every great
avatar. Christians or students of Christian literature in America who
are accustomed to hear the mystery of the virgin birth referred to as
one of the problems of faith, and one of the doctrinal points upon
which the faith of thousands of Christians is broken, are surprised
when they tour through foreign lands to find that even those who are
not Christians and who are of the Moslem, Hindu, Buddhist, or other
faiths, find no difficulty in accepting the story of a divine, spiritual
conception and birth, and believe that this one feature of the life of
the Master Jesus is the only one which is consistent with the claim that
Jesus was the great Redeemer and Savior of the world.
In fact, during my recent trip through lands which brought me in
contact with persons of Oriental faiths, I found most of them who
were not Christians expressing themselves on this subject in this wise:
“If you Christians believe that Jesus was a Son of God, or the divinely
appointed messenger to redeem any part of the world through the
message he had to give, then you must believe that he was divinely
conceived and born, for there can be no question of such distinctive
birth if he was a divine messenger.” When I explained to some of
them that there were so-called Christians or students of the Christian
doctrine who could not accept the idea of divine conception and
birth, but who still believed that Jesus was a great master, a divinely
appointed messenger, a true Son of God, and an avatar of unusual
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 42 —
authority from on high, these people merely smiled and said that such
a viewpoint was an absurdity, for—according to their viewpoint—no
one humanly conceived and born could attain any degree of divine
authority which would make that person the Christ.
Thus we see that the great problem resolves itself into a problem
not of the fact of the virgin birth or the divinity of Jesus, but a problem
of human comprehension on the part of the consciousness in the
Occidental world as compared with the consciousness we find in the
Oriental world. In other words, we are face to face with the fact that
not the validity of the claim of the virgin birth of Jesus should be
given serious thought by students of spiritual mysticism in the Western
world, but the lack of understanding and comprehension on the part
of those millions who have not yet attained the proper degree of
spiritual understanding regarding the spiritual laws operating in such
important events.
The Oriental of any of the various faiths points out to us of the
Occidental world the fact that we are attempting to struggle with a
principle in the spiritual world with which we are least acquainted, and
for a comprehension of which we are least prepared. The mystics of
all lands agree that until human beings are prepared, through spiritual
development and comprehension of the higher laws, to understand
easily the actuality of spiritual conception and divine birth in its sublime
fullness, we are not ready in any sense to understand the teachings and
the true message brought to this world by any of the great avatars,
especially that of the last and greatest of them all, Jesus the Christ.
This does not mean that it is impossible for the sincere student
of Christian doctrines to comprehend at least the mystical laws
involved in the possibility of a divine birth, but it does mean that
such a student must try to see and comprehend the mysticism that is
fundamental in all of the Christian doctrines. The Rosicrucians hold
the same viewpoint that the Orientals hold in this regard; namely,
that the orthodox Christianity in the Western world today too greatly
slights the mysticism and mystical principles which are fundamental to
Christianity and which constituted the pristine Christianity of ancient
times. In other words, too much thought is given to the literal meaning
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 43 —
of words and the material interpretation of all of the principles
involved in Christianity, which leaves almost a total neglect of the
pure mysticism that makes possible a real understanding or spiritual
comprehension of Christianity in its original form.
Added to this is the reluctance on the part of the Occidental world
to accept as facts and actual possibilities the so-called miracles of the
Bible. I do not agree with such authorities as the late William Jennings
Bryan and others who have claimed that the scientific trend of our
thinking and our highly scientific education in the Occidental world
has tended to blind us to the spiritual truths in the Bible or in all
sacred literature. I do not believe that materialistic science is in any
way responsible for the Occidental’s inability to understand the higher
spiritual statements found in the sacred writings of the Bible or the
other books of other creeds. I believe that this inability on the part
of the minds of the Western world is due to the unawakened status
of the spiritual side of our natures and the absence, except in the
various occult and metaphysical schools of the Western world, of such
general teachings along spiritual lines as would properly prepare us for
an understanding of that which is accepted readily and understood
thoroughly by the Oriental mind.
I have said that we should bear in mind that Jesus was not the first
of the great teachers, who came as messengers of God, to be born of a
virgin or to have been conceived by Divine Principle. A few references
to similar incidents in the past may help my readers to understand what
is meant by this statement.
It is a fact that divine births and divine conceptions were so currently
accepted among the ancients that whenever they heard of one who
was greatly distinguished in human affairs, they immediately classified
such a person as having been born of supernatural lineage. Even in the
polytheistic religions, various gods were declared to have descended
from Heaven and been made incarnate in humans. The learned
Thomas Maurice, in his unusual book called Indian Antiquities, goes
so far as to state that “in every age and in almost every religion of the
Asiatic world, there seems uniformly to have flourished an immemorial
tradition that one god had, from all eternity, begotten another god.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 44 —
I may add that our own records of ancient traditions and sacred
writings contain many references to religious movements in antiquity,
in which the great leader was claimed to be “God’s Begotten Son.”
India had a number of avatars or divine messengers who were
incarnated through divine conception, and two of them bore the name
of Krishna, or Krishna the Savior. Now Krishna was born of a chaste
virgin called Devaki, who, on account of her purity, was selected to
become the mother of God. In this instance, we find a very ancient story
of a virgin giving birth to a divinely conceived messenger of God.
Buddha was considered and believed by all his followers to have
been begotten of God and born of a virgin whose name was Maya or
Mary. In the ancient stories of the birth of Buddha, as understood
by all the Orientals and found in their sacred writings long before the
Christian era, we read how the divine power, called the Holy Ghost,
descended upon the virgin Maya. In the ancient Chinese version of the
story, the Holy Ghost is called Shing-Shin.
The Siamese, likewise, had a god and savior who was virgin born
and whom they called Codom. In this ancient story, the beautiful
young virgin had been informed in advance that she was to become
the mother of a great messenger of God, and one day while in her
usual period of meditation and prayer, she was impregnated by divine
sunbeams. When the boy was born, he grew up in a remarkable manner,
became a protege of wisdom, and performed miracles.
When the first Europeans visited Cape Comorin, the most southerly
extremity of the Indian subcontinent, they were surprised to find the
natives worshiping a Lord and Savior who had been divinely conceived
and born of a virgin.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 45 —
The serpent was used as a mystical symbol in the early sacred writings of
various schools of religion. It was very often used as an emblem of the
Word or Logos, and in this sense it became the symbol of the tempter in
the fall of humans. The serpent was also the emblem of the Holy Ghost
or the power that impregnated the life in the virgin. In this sense it was
the incarnation of the “Logos.” The emblem shown above represents
the serpent as found engraved or carved on many ancient monuments
to represent the “Logos.” The Ophites also venerated this same symbol
as an emblem of Jesus the Christ.
When the first Jesuit missionaries visited China, they wrote in their
reports that they were appalled at finding in the polytheistic religion
of that country a story of a redeeming master who had been born
of a virgin and divinely conceived. This god was said to have been
born in 3468 B.C. Lao-Tze, the famous Chinese teacher, was claimed
to have been born of a virgin, black in complexion, and described as
marvelous and as beautiful as jasper.
In Egypt, long before the dawn of Christianity, and long before
any of the writers of the present Christian Bible were born, or any
of its doctrines conceived of as Christian, the Egyptian people
had several messengers of God who were born of virgins through
divine conception. Horus was known to all the ancient Egyptians as
having been born of the virgin Isis, and his conception and birth was
considered one of the three great mysteries or mystical doctrines of
the Egyptian religion. To them, every incident in connection with the
conception and birth of Horus was pictured, sculpted, adored, and
worshiped as are the incidents of the conception and birth of Jesus
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 46 —
among the Christians today. Another Egyptian god called Ra was born
of a virgin. I have seen on one of the ancient walls of a temple along
the Nile, a beautifully carved picture representing the god Thoth—
the messenger of God— telling the maiden, Queen Mautmes, that
she is to give birth to a divine Son of God, who will be the king and
redeemer of her people.
Turning to Persia, we find that Zoroaster was the first of the world
redeemers acclaimed to have been born in innocence through the
conception of a virgin. Ancient carvings and pictures of this great
messenger show him surrounded by an aura of light that filled the
humble place of his birth. Cyrus, king of Persia, was also believed to
have been of divine origin. In the records of his time, he was referred
to as the Christ or the anointed Son of God and was considered as God’s
messenger.
Even Plato, who was born in Athens, 429 B.C., was believed by the
populace to have been a divine Son of God by a pure virgin called
Perictione. It is recorded in the ancient records that the father of Plato,
who was known as Aris, had been admonished in a spiritual dream
to hold pure and sacred the person of his wife until after the divine
conception and birth of the child that was to come, and that this child’s
conception would be by divine means.
Apollonius, who was still living and performing great miracles and
teaching in various lands during the early part of the life of Jesus,
was also born of a virgin mother according to the stories that were
recorded of him during and shortly after his time. According to these
stories, the mother of Apollonius in 41 B.C. was informed by a god in
a dream that she would give birth to a great messenger of God who
would be known as Apollonius.
Speaking of famous miracle workers and teachers who left behind
them unquestioned records of great work in behalf of humanity, we
find that Pythagoras, who was born about 570 B.C., had divine honors
paid to him through and after his lifetime. According to the sacred
writings about him, his mother conceived him through a spectre, or
the Holy Ghost, which appeared to her. His father, or foster father,
was also informed through a vision that his wife was to bring forth
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 47 —
a son through divine conception and that the son would become a
benefactor to humanity.
The story of Aesculapius is very interesting. He became a great
performer of miracles, a messenger with a divine message for all
humanity, and was considered a true Son of God. When the Messenians
sought to learn of the birth of Aesculapius, they consulted the oracle
of Delphi and were informed that an invisible God or Holy Ghost
of the Divine Kingdom was his father, that Coronis was his earthly
mother, and that he was born at Epidaurus.
According to the story, when Coronis experienced the sacred event
of divine conception, she sought to conceal her pregnancy from
her father because she did not believe that she could make worldly
people understand the strange occurrence. So she went into hiding
at Epidaurus, where the child was delivered months later in a lowly
and humble goat stable on a mountainside. A herder of goats, named
Aristhenes, going in search of a goat and a dog missing from his fold,
discovered the young child in the stable and would have carried him
home had he not seen, when approaching the child, that its head was
encircled with fiery rays which told him that the child was a divine
being. His report of the finding of the child spread throughout the
land, and people from all quarters flocked to the stable to pay homage
to the Son of God and brought valuable presents which they laid at
the feet of the infant. The child was honored as a god not only in
Phoenicia and Egypt, but the worship of him passed into Greece and
Rome.
Even on this side of the great ocean, the natives of North and
South America had gods that were supposed to have been divinely
born. Long before the landing of Columbus, the inhabitants of ancient
Mexico worshiped a savior and world redeemer whom they called
Quetzalcoatl, who was born of a pure virgin according to the traditions
which the church leaders, who came with Columbus, discovered in the
ancient writings carved on the walls of the temples. According to the
story, then long established, a messenger from Heaven had announced
to his mother that she would bear a son by divine conception, and that
he would be the savior of the world. There was an established Mexican
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 48 —
hieroglyphic which conveyed the story of the divine conception and
birth of this Mexican god.
The Mayas of Yucatan also had a virgin-born god, corresponding
to Quetzalcoatl, whose name was Zama; and he was termed “the only
begotten son of the Supreme God.” In Central America and Peru,
there were other divinely conceived and uniquely born gods.
I think I have shown, in just these few out of the many hundreds
of well-recorded instances, that among the Orientals, and especially
among those peoples whose religions had a well developed mystical
basis, the idea of virgin or divine birth was not an improbability, but a
well-accepted possibility.
It has been said by many of the critics of the story of the virgin
birth of Jesus, that if Jesus had been conceived and born as stated
in the Christian records, it is strange that none of the contemporary
writers, none of his disciples, not even Jesus himself, ever referred to
this fact during his lifetime, and that only many years after his passing
did the story of his divine conception and birth become established.
This sort of argument would be sound and reasonable only if the
virgin birth was unique with Jesus or, in other words, if he had been
the first and only great messenger of God to have been considered of
divine origin and birth. But if we consider that it was common belief
among the peoples of the Oriental lands, and of Egypt and Palestine,
that every great messenger, every avatar, every Son of God ordained
by divine decree to raise the status of the peoples of that time was
born of divine conception, then we can understand why in the case of
Jesus, neither his disciples nor the historians considered the event of
such outstanding importance as to write about it, be enthusiastic over
it, or make of it the unusual miracle that the Christian church makes of
it today.
In tracing back the very complete records of the ancient pre-Christian
avatars and Sons of God that greatly influenced the development of
civilization, we find in the Rosicrucian records and in some other
writings that are fragmentary, that the disciples and followers of each
of these avatars or messengers devoted more time and thought to
the recording of the sayings, teachings, and demonstrations of the
avatars than to the recording of the events connected with their births
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 49 —
and transitions. Even in the score or more cases where the divine
conceptions and divine births of these pre-Christian avatars in various
lands are recorded, the statements are brief, concise, and very often
merely incidental to the story being told. The facts of the virgin birth
are disposed of hurriedly as though they were of secondary importance
and to be taken for granted by the reader of the life of each of these
avatars.
In no case do we find that the disciples and followers of the avatars
considered the divine conception and birth as a feature for adoration
and worship, as we find in the case of the Christian teachings today.
Very often the statements in regard to these miraculous births were
made as briefly as we, at the present time, refer to the fact that some
great person was born on such and such a date, with the assumption
that every person is born and must be born at some place in a manner
in keeping with his or her race and the conditions of the country in
which the event occurred.
I am sure that when these facts are taken into consideration, those
who have heretofore been puzzled because so few historical references
can be found in ancient writings regarding the divine conception and
birth of Jesus will realize that they have been seeking for something
that, from the Oriental point of view, was not the outstanding or
important event of his life. It is a fact that among the Orientals the
lives and teachings and practical demonstrations of the teachings on
the part of these avatars were considered all that was important about
them, and the incidents of birth and location of birth, and of their
ultimate passing, were points to be considered only by those intimately
associated with the avatars and were recorded merely for the purpose
of completing the record.
The next important point to have in mind is the fact that the
reason for the general acceptance by mystics of the fact of divine
conception lies in the common belief among the mystics and Oriental
philosophers that the power of thought or the power of a mental or
audible word is capable of impregnating matter and bringing lifeless
matter into consciousness. If we try to assume that the impregnation
of matter in a mystical manner like this is an unusual miracle of
doubtful nature, never having been proved, and not acceptable except
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 50 —
on the basis of unfounded faith, then we must also assume that all
the fundamental teachings of the mystics of the Orient, and all of the
claims made in occult and mystical literature by competent teachers
and by those whose fame and integrity have been well established, are
false, unfounded, unreliable, and unworthy of our consideration. And
if we assume this, then there is little hope for us in the teachings that
come from the Orient, and little reason for us to believe in the superior
power and hidden, secret principles of divine energy.
The mystics of all ages have claimed, and through the so-called
miracles have proved to themselves, that certain latent, potent
principles can be invoked by humans and are applied by God in the
creative processes of the universe. The very creation of the world
itself is considered by all the mystics of the Orient as the first great
demonstration of the potency of the Logos, or the power of the
Word breathed into space where no life existed, resulting in immediate
impregnation and the manifestation of living matter. The mystics of
the Orient rightfully contend that in the beginning all nonliving matter
was impregnated with life by a divine process, without the application
of material laws. No other conception is possible to their understanding
or acceptable to them. And if the first great impregnation of life in
this manner is accepted, why should there be any question of lesser
demonstrations in the case of an individual being, or the impregnation
of a single cell of life?
Mystics of all times have demonstrated that even the spoken word,
composed of a properly intoned vowel, has the power to disturb the
status of matter and to set it into vibration or to change its elementary
nature or its chemical composition. In demonstration of this, mystics
of the Orient—and some highly evolved ones of the Occident— have
learned how to utter a sound, or to produce a sound upon a violin
string or other musical instrument, which would cause a manifestation
in matter.
It is common with the Rosicrucians and with mystics of other
schools who have learned how, and who have developed to the proper
degree of perfection in these things, to utter vowel sounds or, by mental
concentration, to direct invisible, potent energies to such focal points
as would cause a manifestation in nonliving and living matter. It is the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 51 —
aim and ambition of millions of students of mystical law to attain that
degree of perfection where they can perform seeming miracles of this
kind. To these mystics and to the rational mind comprehending the
laws involved, it would seem that if humans are capable of applying
these mystical principles in such a manner as this, it certainly would
not be improbable, let alone impossible, for the Mind of God to have
directed certain powers to impregnate matter and bring about not only
the virgin birth with which we are dealing in this chapter of the book,
but many similar manifestations of an unusual nature.
Therefore, the Rosicrucian of evolved understanding, or the mystic
of spiritual attainment, readily and understandingly accepts the virgin
birth of Jesus and sees in it no violation of natural or spiritual law, nor
any exception to truly scientific principles. Those who cannot accept
the virgin birth or divine birth of the Master Jesus are probably laboring
under the limiting comprehension of materialistic consideration and
have not attained a spiritual development in their evolution which
makes possible the comprehension and apprehension of the higher
laws.
There is but one point upon which the Rosicrucians and the mystics
of the Orient disagree with the fundamentalist or strictly orthodox of
the Christian church, and this is in the uniqueness of the conception and
birth of the Master Jesus. The Christian doctrines teach that Jesus was
the only begotten Son of God, and the only instance where the Word
was made flesh and where God sent upon the earth a Divine Son to
redeem the world. The Rosicrucians understand that Jesus was not the
first and only, but the last and greatest of all the messengers of God
conceived in this manner and born on earth.
This brings us to another point of consideration before presenting
the ancient, mystical story of the birth of Jesus. In a previous chapter,
I stated that the Essenes, the Nazarenes, and the mystics of Palestine
anticipated the coming of a great master who would be the incarnation
of one of the former great leaders. I also stated that it was the common
belief among the Jews that the Messiah which they expected would
likewise be the incarnation of one of their former deliverers. In these
statements you will note the belief on the part of the people of the
Orient in the fact of reincarnation, which was an established belief
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 52 —
throughout the entire Oriental world and which is today a positive
principle in the religious and philosophical thought of more than
three quarters of the earth’s population, questioned only by part of
the people in the Western world.
The Orientals also knew, through previous experiences, that the
great avatars and messengers of God, who came to them from time to
time as the evolution of the races required, were the reincarnation of
the previous great souls on earth and had attained in each incarnation
a higher and still higher degree of spiritual expression and mastership.
Just when each one of these messengers would appear in a final
incarnation it was impossible for them to tell, but since all incarnations
were progressive, and since each messenger was greater and more
advanced than the preceding one, the Essenes, the Nazarenes, and
even the Jews of Palestine anticipated that the messenger who would
come to them would be greater than any of the preceding avatars and
would probably be the reincarnation of one of the greatest of those
who had served them in the past.
It was natural for the Jews to feel that such a messenger or Messiah
would be the reincarnation of one of their previous deliverers, perhaps
Moses, and most certainly of the House of David. On the other hand,
the Essenes and those of the Aryan race believed (and based their
belief upon a better understanding of the mystical laws than the Jews
possessed) that the new great master and redeemer for the world
would be of the Aryan race, in the form of a reincarnation of one of
the great masters who had served the world in other lands and who
would not be limited to the tribes of Israel.
For this reason, the Essenes in Palestine and in Egypt and other
locations fully anticipated that from their own race and from among
the members of their own organization would come the next great
master, because the Essenes represented at this time the group of
most highly evolved and spiritually trained beings on earth.
— 53 —
Chapter 5
THE MYSTICAL BIRTH OF JESUS
BEFORE GIVING THE account of the birth of Jesus as it is recorded in the ancient Rosicrucian records, I wish to call to the attention of my readers the following important points.
At the time of the birth of Jesus, the Essenian community as a part of the G.W.B. was not only well established in various parts of Egypt and Palestine with its largest center of members in Egypt, located at Alexandria, and its very large community district in Galilee, but the organization maintained a great secret temple at Heliopolis in Egypt where the supreme officers met and where the highest ceremonies of the organization were held. This temple was often referred to in ancient records as the Temple of Helios, or the “temple of the sun.” In Palestine, a smaller temple for the sacred ceremonies of the Essenes in and around Jerusalem was located close to one of the Jerusalem gates. It was in this temple in Jerusalem that officers of the Essenian organization in Palestine assembled for their high ceremonies.
Perhaps it is necessary to explain at this point, also, that in all the ancient temples of the G.W.B., Including those of the Essenes, the young daughters of the highest members of the organization served as virgins or as vestals for certain periods of their lives and were under the guardianship of the organization. In all the Rosicrucian branches throughout the world today, including those in North America, there are several vestals associated with each temple or lodge representing the spiritual consciousness of the Cosmic. These girls are always daughters
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 54 —
of parents who have been in the organization for some time. They are
highly respected and aided in every way to high attainments in all the
ethical, cultural, and educational principles of the land.
With these points in mind, I now present what is probably the oldest
and most complete story of the virgin birth or divine birth of the
Master Jesus, as it has been recorded and preserved in the archives
of the Rosicrucian organization in Egypt, India, and Tibet. I have
had to condense the story slightly for presentation in this book, in
order that the entire volume might not become too large, but I have
not eliminated any essential detail nor altered any of the important
mystical phrases.
The following story is the one that is generally accepted with
perfect understanding by the mystics of the G.W.B., and I trust that
the mystics of the Western world will find in it a perfect explanation
of this greatest of all mystical mysteries.
In the days of the mystic sects and sacred cults of the G.W.B. of
the Orient, there was one Joachim who was high priest in the holy
Temple of Helios at the outer gate of Jerusalem. He was a devout
follower of the sacred rituals and had pledged to give all that was his
to the great work. And when the time came that his wife, Anna, was
to have a child, they agreed that if it should be a girl, and she should
show in her infancy that she was divinely ordained, she should become
a Dove in the holy temple and remain a virgin of the sacred sanctum.
And in the ninth month Anna bore a child, and it was a girl as the
astrologers (magi) of the temple had predicted. When the days were
accomplished, Anna purified herself, and gave the child the breast, and
called its name Mary because the sun at birth was in the sign of Libra.
When the child was six months old it was taken by the parents to
the temple that the child might be examined and that which it carried
from its last life revealed in the presence of the priests and the magi.
The child was placed in the sanctum upon its own feet, with its face
toward the East, while the mother sat upon a white cloth at the foot of
the vestal fire. The baby was urged to walk and it did walk. The priests
and magi noticed that the child took seven steps and then knelt upon its
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 55 —
knees before its mother in the sanctum. And as the magi chanted, the
mother lifted up her child and cried aloud to the heavens: “As the Lord
my God liveth, thou shalt not walk upon this earth until I give thee to
the temple of the Lord.” And the priests glorified in the fulfillment of
the prophecy that Joachim, their high priest, should give to the temple
a virgin.
The mother was true to her promise. She made a sanctuary in her
home and placed a cloth from the Temple of Helios upon the floor
on which the child Mary should walk so that she set foot not upon
the earth until the day of her deliverance to the temple. The mother
suffered nothing common or unclean to pass by her child and called
the undefiled virgins of the priests of the temples to lead her about
the improvised sanctuary and to carry her into the rose gardens when
the sun was mellow.
The child’s first birthday came and there was a sacred feast at the
home of Joachim and Anna, and all the priests and scribes and magi
of the temples of the community were present. Joachim brought the
child Mary from the sanctuary to the priests, and she was sprinkled
with undefiled water and the petals of the rose, and the magi officially
proclaimed her name to be Mary, the Dove of Helios. The priests
blessed her and prayed to God, saying: “O God of our Hearts, bless
this child and make her name, as the magi have just proclaimed it to
be, a name to be eternally named in all generations of the children of
God.” And all present said, “So be it, So be it, Amen!”
Her mother then took the Dove to the sanctuary to give it breast,
and she sang a song to God saying: “I sing thee a song, O holy child,
a song unto God, for [God] hath given me the fruit of righteousness.
Harken, ye scribes of the twelve kingdoms of our land, for the Holy
Dove is with me and God abideth with us.” And when the feast was
ended they went away rejoicing, each of the twelve scribes to bring the
great tidings to their twelve temples of the twelve kingdoms.
The months passed and the child became two years old and there
was another birthday feast. And Joachim said, “Let us carry Mary to the
temple, that we may render the vow which we promised, lest perchance
God refuse us the privilege and our gift become unacceptable.” But
Anna, her mother, said: “Seest not that Mary is wise and strong for her
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 56 —
years and blessed with an understanding not of this life but that which
she carried with her to the mouth of my womb when she was born? In
another year she will be stronger and of wisdom sufficient to permit
her to journey to the temple alone without her father and mother as in
the past.” And Joachim agreed.
And when the child became three years of age and was exceedingly
bright with inner understanding, Joachim called the priests and scribes
of the twelve kingdoms and invited the undefiled virgins of the priests
to escort Mary to the temple. The virgins came with the sacred lamps
burning with joy at the gift of God to the temple. But Mary refused
escort and was carried only by her mother to the temple gate, that her
feet might not touch the earth. The virgins were within the temple
chanting and incensing the sanctum when Mary was received at the
outer portal by the priests of Helios. The child was then taken into the
temple and placed on the third step leading to the altar while the sacred
fire burned and the priest prayed to God, saying: “God hath magnified
[God’s] purposes and [God’s] name in all generations, and through
this child God will manifest [God’s] redemption to the children of this
land.” And he blessed the child, and she danced with joy and walked
from the altar into the sanctum and knelt before the shekinah.
As the parents made their way toward the door of the temple they
turned and saw that the child asked not to go. And as the virgins and
priests and the scribes and magi walked to the West of the temple
they cast rose leaves upon the kneeling child. The parents marveled at
the child’s desire to remain alone in the great temple. When they had
departed and the child was alone, Mary saw her own child body floating
as a dove in the air, and from out of the space above the shekinah there
appeared a hand as though of an angel giving Mary as she floated a
morsel of food. And a voice, as if from the angel, said: “Behold, this
is to be thy food henceforth, for no longer shalt thou find milk at the
mother’s breast, for thou hast sucked that which God hath provided
and now thou shalt eat only that which thy kin shall serve thee.”
At the time Mary became twelve years of age she was made womanly
with functions which gave sign and symbol that her day had come to
fulfill the vow of her parents. A council was held of the priests and the
magi, who said: “Behold, Mary the Dove is become twelve years old
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 57 —
and she giveth sign that her day either to dwell within the temple or be
given in marriage has come. Shall we take her now or wait the allotted
time of twelve years and eleven months?” And the magi replied: “Go
before the altar and ask God to show that which is right and whatever
God shall manifest to thee, that also will we do.”
And Joachim, as high priest, entered the sanctum and placed upon his
official garment the triangular breastplate, and prayed for illumination.
And a form appeared to him, saying, “Joachim, Joachim, go forth and
summon the widowers of the [community] who hath homes and let
them take a sacred staff apiece, and Mary shall be given to be cared for
to him to whom God shall show a sign.” And Joachim reported that
which was given to him, and the scribes were informed to bring forth
the widowers of their kingdoms.
Now there was one, by name Joseph, who was of the Essenian
community at Galilee, and who was a devout brother of the temple of
his kingdom; and when he heard that all the widowers were summoned
to Helios, he laid down his axe and tools with which he was building a
house, and hastened to meet the others. When all the widowers were
assembled before the Temple of Helios, the high priest selected 144
sacred staffs and purified them before the altar and gave each of the
widowers a staff. But there was no sign given by which Joachim could
tell the answer to the selection the voice promised.
Joseph was the last to receive a staff and as he lifted it in sacred
salutation to the high priest, behold a white dove went out of the
rod and hovered over the head of Joseph. And the high priest said to
Joseph: “Thou hast been allotted to receive the virgin which hath been
given to Helios, to keep with thyself in thy home.” But Joseph refused,
saying he knew not what was intended by the gathering and that he had
two sons and he was old, and the virgin appeared to be a young girl not
yet thirteen as was the law.
The high priest admonished Joseph, reminding him what God did
to Dathan and Abiram and Korah, how the earth opened and they
were swallowed up because of their gainsaying. And Joseph feared and
offered to take the virgin and to keep with himself the Dove of Helios.
And he said to Mary: “Behold, I have received thee from the temple
of God, and I will leave thee in my house and go to finish my building
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 58 —
and will come to thee.” And thus came Mary to live with Joseph, the
widower and builder, as the virgin of the community.
And there came a time when the council of the priests of Helios
was called to make plans for the making of a new curtain for the
temple. And the priests said, “Let us call the undefiled virgins of our
community and also our Dove of the temple.” And when the call
was answered, there were seven virgins. And Mary was sent for as the
Dove of the temple. When they were within the temple, the high priest
ordered that lots should be cast to see who should spin the gold for
the curtain and who should spin the green, the scarlet, the purple, the
blue, and the fine linen and silk. And the true purple and scarlet fell to
the lot of Mary, their Dove. And she took the materials and went away
to her home.
As she worked upon her spinning there appeared to her a figure of
a great master who said: “Fear not! I come to bring thee a message of
great joy, Mary, Holy Virgin and Sacred Dove of Helios, for thy day
hath come to fulfill the prophecy of the magi! Thou hast found favor
with God and thy [brothers and sisters], and now thou shalt conceive
from the word of God.” And when Mary heard this she disputed,
saying: “Shall I conceive from the word of God? And yet shall I bear
as every woman beareth?”
And the voice of the figure said: “Not in the manner of thy
understanding shalt thou conceive, but in the manner of thy
understanding shalt thou bear. For though the lips of man may kiss
thee as the hands of the high priest hath blessed thee, so shalt the
seed of man be thy heritage; but the word of God shall be breathed
upon thee and its power shall make thee holy and bless the seed that it
may be of God. Wherefore, also, that holy life which shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God, and he shall attain the name Jesus
because he shall be the God in [humanity] and will become the God with
[humanity.]” And Mary answered: “It shall be according to the word of
God!”
Mary wrought the purple and the scarlet and took it to the high
priest. He spoke to Mary and told her he had been informed that her
day had come to conceive and he blessed her and rejoiced with her,
and told her that her name would be holy in all the generations of the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 59 —
earth. Mary went away, in time of preparation, to her cousin Elizabeth
and stayed there until her condition was so manifest that she again
sought the privacy of her home sanctuary.
Her sixth month came and Joseph returned from his housebuilding
and found Mary was with child and he was surprised and sorrowful. He
smote his face and threw himself upon the sackcloth of the sanctuary
and wept bitterly, saying: “With what face shall I look to my God? for
I receive a virgin, and the Dove of our temple, and have not guarded
over her and she has been defiled by man? Who hath done this thing
in my home? Is not the history of Adam repeated in me?”
And Joseph arose from his sackcloth and called Mary and said to
her: “Why hast thou who walked the seven steps and was raised to
the third step of the Holy of Holies in our temple, permitted man to
defile thee? Didst thou not receive food from the hands of an angel
as a token that thou wast not to accept from the profane that which
would feed the earthly desires?” And she wept bitterly that Joseph did
not know and that he should mistrust her, and she cried: “I am pure
and know no man!”
And Joseph was filled with awe and challenged her words, saying:
“Whence then is it that thou art thus?” And she said with sweetness
of voice: “As our God liveth I know not how this came but through
the word! As I slept [God] came unto me with pureness of spirit, freed
from the mortal body, and whereas [God] breathed not the breath of
lust but spake with the breath of the word of God, I conceived in fact
as God first conceived in thought; and as the thought preceded the
creation of the world, so with me the most holy of all words preceded
the quickening that came upon me.”
And Joseph was afraid lest those who knew not of the laws of a
God would misunderstand and misjudge, and he was in a quandary.
But in the night there came to him the voice of the master, saying: “Be
not afraid, for that which she hath conceived is of the Holy Spirit, and
she shall bear a son and the Heavenly Hosts shall call his name Jesus
because the Holy Spirit, through the word of God, shall be in him.”
And there came later a scribe to the home of Joseph to inquire about
his absence from a meeting of the community. And the scribe saw that
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 60 —
Mary was with child and he went forthwith to the high priest and was
ready to attest that Mary had been defiled. And the high priest sent
for Joseph and Mary and gave them hearing and listened knowingly to
Mary’s declaration of innocence and purity and then reasoned with the
scribe. The magi consulted, and it was decided that the test should be
given whereby their auras would manifest the color of sin, if sin there
be upon them. And each was given a drink from the vessel containing
the radiant water and they were placed in the dark and naught but
pureness of light came from them and no sin was made manifest.
And the high priest said: “If the God of our temple manifests not thy
sin through [Gods] laws, then I cannot judge you.” And he dismissed
them as pure in heart and clean in body.
The day came when Joseph found it necessary to journey with
Mary to avoid censure because of his predicament and Mary’s strange
experience. And they came to a cave where they rested at Mary’s
request, for she believed her hour at hand. Joseph sought aid and met
a woman who came to the cave and met Mary and heard the strange
story and believed it not. And in all directions Joseph saw that the
heavens and the earth and the distant people upon it were silent and
motionless and he knew that the presence of God was upon the face
of the earth and that some miracle was about to be wrought.
While he and the woman waited in the cave, a great light came
into the darkness and repelled them and it hovered over Mary. And
the light became smaller in size and more dense in whiteness until it
enveloped Mary and then slowly reduced to naught. And as Joseph and
the woman watched in the silence the light was gone and there came
the cry of a baby’s voice and an angel appeared and said unto them:
“At this hour, in humility of spirit, and with pureness of mind, to a
virgin in the temple there is now born the Son of God, conceived by
the Holy Spirit through the word of God. And his name will become
Jesus, for that is the name of God into which the fire of spirit and the
power of the word is given. But I warn thee not to tell to the profane
that which has happened, for they will believe thee not but will say that
unto a virgin some mortal man hath given child; and they will curse
thee as a defiler of thy trust.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 61 —
Joseph and Mary made ready to depart from the cave where they
had been some time and were met by the magi who came, saying:
“Where is the great King whose star in the heavens declares his birth?
This hour should see him and his parents upon the highway, for his
hour of birth is passed.” And Joseph said: “I come unto Judea with the
Son of God, not the King, for his Kingdom is not of the land but of
the hearts of [men and women].”
And when Herod heard that a great king was born who fulfilled
the strange predictions of the prophets, he made inquiries and was
troubled. And when the magi of the G.W.B. heard what Herod
threatened, they warned Joseph, while blessing Mary and giving to her
of their script, gold, frankincense, and myrrh. And Joseph and Mary
proceeded on their way by another road.
— 62 —
Chapter 6
THE BIRTHPLACE AND THE MAGI
IT MAY NOT be generally realized that there is a very interesting story in connection with the birthplace of the Holy Child, as for many centuries the exact location of the place has been an important point of discussion and is even disputed at the present time among the highest authorities.
We note in the Christian Gospel of Matthew the inference that Jesus was born in a house in Bethlehem. The words of Matthew are:
“In the time of King Herod, after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, [magi] from the East came to Jerusalem, asking, ‘Where is the child who has been born king of the Jews? For we observed his star in the East, and have come to pay him homage.’ . . . On entering the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother; and they knelt down and paid him homage.”
No comments are made in the usual Christian Bible in regard to the statement in Matthew that Mary and the child were in a house, and this difference of location usually passed unnoticed. We must bear in mind that the writer of the Book of Luke distinctly implies that the child was born in a stable, in the following words:
“And she gave birth to her firstborn son and wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 63 —
Just why the almost universal impression exists that Jesus was born
in a manger when there are two different statements in that regard
will be explained in a moment. The fact of the matter is that in the
early Christian days there was a third version of the place of birth that
was exceedingly popular and based upon information not generally
revealed in the present day Christian stories.
We find, for instance, that Eusebius, the first ecclesiastical historian,
who played an important part in the Council of Nicaea, in A.D. 325,
when most of the important traditions of the Christian church were
discussed and decided, brought the matter of the birthplace of Jesus
before the council for a positive decision. In his discussions he said
little about a house or a manger being the reputed birthplace of the
Holy Child, but said that the infant Jesus had been born in a cave
instead. And he referred to the fact that at the time of Constantine a
magnificent temple had been erected on the site of the cave, so that
Christians might worship the place where the Savior was born.
In the apocryphal gospel called Protevangelion written by James, a
brother of Jesus, we find reference to the cave again in the following
words: “But on a sudden the cloud became a great light in the cave, so
their eyes could not bear it.”
Of the prominent leaders of the Christian church in the early days,
we find that Tertullian (A.D. 200), Jerome (A.D. 375), and others, said
that Jesus was born in a cave, and all the heathens of Palestine point
to the cave in their land to this very day as the birthplace of the Christ
Child.
We find also that Canon Farrar said: “That the actual place of
Christ’s birth was a cave, is a very ancient tradition, and this cave used
to be shown as the scene of the event, even so early as the time of
Justin Martyr in A.D. 150.”
Now the facts of the matter are that Matthew was nearly correct
when he said that Jesus was born in a house, for the cave in which the
child was born was more than an empty excavation under a rock, or
a hollow place in the mountainside. The Rosicrucian records and the
Essenian records have always contained the statement that the child of
Mary and Joseph was born in an Essenian grotto on the highway near
Bethlehem.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 64 —
I have previously referred to the fact that the Essenes possessed
certain rescue houses and hospices in various parts of Palestine, and
three of these were grottos. Usually such grottos were partly natural
and partly artificial, and we know that grottos of this kind were
quite common throughout Palestine and adjoining lands, for in early
Christian days it was found safer and better to build grottos than
large structures above ground when the purpose of such places was
protection, isolation, and safety. The number of grottos still existing in
Palestine always surprises the investigating tourists, and many of them
are large enough to contain from ten to twenty rooms of a fair size,
free from moisture, dampness, heat, or cold.
The Essenes made their three grottos very large, very convenient
in location, and well protected from casual observation and attack by
Bedouins or other tribes. Such grottos were located from twenty to
sixty feet below the earths surface, with rooms that were approached
by well-cut stone stairways descending at a wide angle and well lighted
by apertures in the side of the rock or rocks that protected the entrance
way. Some of the rooms were carefully hewn out of solid rock while
others were partly natural in their formation. In most cases, the surface
of the rock walls of the rooms was covered with a mud cement over
which decorations or paint of some kind were applied in an artistic
manner.
Oil lamps, hung from the ceilings or set in niches in the walls,
furnished ample illumination; and small apertures between the rooms,
or rising upward into traversed channels, provided a proper circulation
of air. Seats, or the foundations for lounges, were cut in the sides of
some of the walls or were formed of rocks in the center or end of
the rooms. There was always a well close to each of these places, and
provision was made in each room for a large jar of fresh water. The
floor of these rooms was usually finished with partly smoothed stones,
much like flagging, and only in one or two of the smaller rooms used
for storage or some other purpose was the floor left with its ground
finish.
These grottos were usually furnished with convenient places for
sleeping, eating, rest, recreation, and the care of the sick. In every way
the appointments and equipment within these grottos were equal to
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 65 —
those found in the mud, stone, or clay structures that were built above
ground. Thus, a grotto home, or hospice, was not considered less
costly or less elegant than one that was built above the surface.
It was into the Essenian grotto near Bethlehem that Joseph and
Mary went for the birth of the child. A few references in the ancient
Essenian and Rosicrucian records regarding the event would indicate
that it had been quite common for the women of the Essenian
organization to go to one of the Essenian hospices for the delivery
of their children. A number of these places were prepared to take
care of the sick, the injured, and the needy, as hospitals do, and it
was traditional among the Essenes, as it is today among the Jewish
people, to give considerable thought and to provide special facilities
for women at the time of delivery. We might almost say that some of
these early hospices were the originals of the present-day [birthing
suites] so well established in various parts of the world.
I recently visited this Essenian grotto near Bethlehem and carefully
investigated the size, shape, and arrangement of the rooms, and I
cannot see how any one of the millions of persons who have seen
the birthplace of the Holy Child can believe that there ever was any
justification in calling it a manger. The large reception room in the
center of the grotto, surrounded by many private rooms, immediately
indicated that it was either a very large home, much larger than any
home commonly found in Palestine, or a public place of some kind.
The stone stairway descending to the rooms would certainly suggest
that the place could not have been used as a stable. When one sees the
careful carving of the stones, the decorations still visible in many places,
the care with which the floors were finished, and the arrangement of
the rooms leading off from the central room, one is impressed at once
with the fact that this was undoubtedly a very well planned and cared
for hospice of some kind. Even today, the rooms are dry enough,
warm enough, and comfortable enough for pleasant living, and when
one sees the crude structures above ground that are usually provided
for cattle (when any structures are provided at all), it is quite evident
that no one would have gone to such trouble and expense for the sake
of providing a stable for cattle.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 66 —
At one of the famous Christian councils held by the early church
leaders, when so many of the doctrines, teachings, and disputed points
of tradition were being discussed and definitely settled, it was finally
voted that the best way to end all of the argument about the birthplace
of Jesus was to arbitrarily determine that a manger was the nature of
the enclosure in which he was born. This arbitrary decision settled the
matter for all time, so far as the church was concerned, and regardless
of the many authentic records that still exist, it is probable that the
story of the birth occurring in a lowly manger will remain a part of the
Christian traditions.
One other important point in connection with the place of birth
and the event of the birth of the Holy Child is likewise interesting.
This pertains to the visit of the magi and the homage they paid to the
Holy Child. According to the authorized Christian versions the three
magi were led by a great star which caused them to journey “from the
East” to the very locality in which the child was born. And they carried
with them treasures and gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
The story of the star appearing in the heavens at this particular time
has always been a fascinating one, and it is also one that skeptics or
doubters of the Christian traditions have looked upon as a fantastic
element, introduced in the account merely to make it picturesque. But
long ago scientific astronomers, who investigated this matter with
their charts of the periodicity of famous comets and moving star-like
bodies, discovered that at or about the time of the birth of the Holy
Infant, there was a great star or heavenly body that was making its
rapid movement across the heavens above these lands.
Not only did this discovery, which has been substantiated by many
scientists for many years, tend to verify the story of a symbol that could
have led the magi in their journey, but the many ancient traditions
regarding similar stories reveal the fact that it was a common belief
among the magi, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the mystics of the
Oriental countries, that whenever a great comet appeared in the sky
and moved across the heavens, a leader or great avatar was about to be
born who would prove to be a Savior or Redeemer. So well established
was this belief, and so many interesting mystical points are involved in
it, that I believe it worthwhile to take a little time at this point to speak
of these matters.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 67 —
It is true that in the story told in the Book of Luke, the writer says
nothing about magi from the “East.” However, he says that shepherds
came and worshiped the young child, and that these shepherds had
been keeping their flocks by night, and that the angel of the Lord
appeared before them saying, “I am bringing you good news of great
joy for all the people: to you is born this day in the city of David a
Savior, who is the Messiah [the Christ], the Lord.”
That statement in the Book of Luke was evidently written for the
purpose of trying to explain the ancient belief that when a great star
appeared, moving across the heavens, it was a message from God that
a Savior was born, and the writer of Luke reduces the idea to a definite
statement made by the Lord to the shepherds in the field.
In investigating the origin of this belief, we find from the old Essenian
and Rosicrucian records that when the divine child called Krishna was
born, a great star in the heavens proclaimed the fact, and Krishna was
immediately adored and honored by the magi, who brought gifts to
him. The old records state that the gifts consisted of sandalwood and
perfumes. Likewise, at the time of the birth of Buddha, a great moving
star in the heavens proclaimed his divinity, and the magi again visited
the place of birth and paid homage and presented gifts.
The birth of Confucius in 351 B.C. was heralded by a great star
moving across the heavens. This was observed by the magi, who found
the location of the great child through the movement of the star, and
went to the place of birth and paid homage: We find the same story in
regard to Mithras, the Persian savior, Socrates, Aesculapius, Bacchus,
Romulus, and a host of others.
We must remember that astrology was the one highly developed
science among the magi and mystics of the Oriental lands, and that
out of this science grew the present-day science of astronomy. It may
be inappropriate, but I cannot fail to take this opportunity of stating
that the ancient practice or art of astrology was more highly developed
than it is today, and it did not deal with the petty things of luck and
misfortune with which our present-day astrology deals, and which so
shamefully blasphemes an ancient and honorable mystical science.
The magi referred to in the Bible were not just astrologers, or
mediocre philosophers, who might have also been shepherds in the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 68 —
field, or ordinary persons of everyday affairs, but were the learned
instructors and high representatives of the great academies and
mystery schools of the Orient. The title of magus was granted only to
one who had attained the very high degree of initiation in the mystery
schools by proving to be a master of the arts and sciences, and by
being a highly evolved mystic in every sense. The magi were consulted
by the kings, potentates, and learned people of all lands, not only in
regard to matters of astrology or astronomy, but in regard to history,
medicine, natural law, spiritual law, and hundreds of other subjects
which required profound thinking and unusual learning to explain or
comprehend. They were the great oracles for the learned. They even
occupied the position of the highest advisers in courts and councils of
last appeal involving disputes of many kinds.
That a few of these magi should have observed the symbolic star
and noted its significance was but natural in their time. But we must
not presume that their observance of the star occurred only a few
hours before the birth of the Holy Child, and that they hurriedly left
their sanctums or their places of occupations and journeyed rapidly
across lands to the birthplace. According to the ancient records at
our disposal, we find that, as in all other cases, where the symbolic
star had been noticed, the movement of this particular star had been
observed for many months prior to the birth of the Holy Infant. For
several weeks prior to the birth, close and careful tabulations had been
made regarding the movement of the star and the probable time of its
ultimate significance. And those who had been selected by the mystery
schools to journey to the place of birth and represent the Essenes and
the G.W.B. had started on their way to Palestine several weeks prior to
the time of the birth.
We find from the records, also, that these magi knew the story of
the selection of Mary as the preordained mother of the Holy Child,
the location of the home of Mary and Joseph in Palestine, and the
arrangements that Mary should go to a particular grotto hospice near
Bethlehem for the delivery of her child. The record states that Mary
was at the hospice three days before the child was born, awaiting the
important hour. The magi were in the vicinity of Bethlehem, also
awaiting the hour.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 69 —
When the star appeared in the heavens at its highest point and then
began its sudden and rapid descent toward the horizon, the magi knew
that the day and hour had come—and they had but to journey a short
distance to the grotto to see the child that had been expected. They
brought not only the things that are itemized in the Christian account,
but greetings from the highest officials of the G.W.B., jewels of a
symbolic nature for the mother and father, and a rosary containing a
rare emblem for the infant to wear about its neck, that it might ever
after be identified as the anticipated Son of God.
The magi, after having officially visited the child and formally
presented their gifts and greetings, journeyed on to Mount Carmel
and there made a report of the birth, and left official instructions for
the keepers of the monastery and school at Carmel in regard to the
education and care of the child throughout its infancy and childhood.
Then these magi went on to Egypt and made their report to the high
priests and the supreme officers of the G.W.B.
— 70 —
Chapter 7
THE BIRTHDATE OF THE HOLY CHILD
THERE HAS ALWAYS been considerable discussion regarding the year in which Jesus was born, but it is not my purpose to participate in this dispute at this time. The fact of the matter is that the actual year, according to the various calendars then existing and now existing, is of little consequence, for a definite year in one calendar would be a different year in another calendar. It would be very difficult for most people to work out a calendar which would enable them to figure correctly the true year of birth.
That the writers of the books of the Bible were confused in regard to the actual year is very apparent after even a casual examination of their statements. For instance, in the Book of Matthew, we are informed that Jesus was born in the days of Herod, the king, and the writer of the Book of Luke states that Jesus was born when Cyrenius was governor of Syria or later. These two statements have caused a great deal of discussion, for the days of Herod ended 4 B.C., and biblical authorities state that Cyrenius was governor of Syria from 4 B.C. to 1 B.C., and again in A.D. 6. Even the matter of the taxing referred to in the stories indicates that a different year is referred to than is commonly accepted as the year of the birth of Jesus.
The very interesting point in regard to the time of birth, however, pertains to the day of the month and the month itself.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 71 —
For many centuries after the life of Jesus, the Christian church
founders and eminent ecclesiastical authorities were unable to decide as
to the birth date of Jesus. Among the early Christians, the anniversary
of the Nativity was celebrated with a great festival in May, sometimes
in April, and on other occasions in January. Some of the earliest
traditions in the Christian church definitely stated that May 20 was the
correct date, while some of the church leaders insisted that April 19 or
20 was the true and correct date. Even up until the fifth century after
the life of Jesus, the matter was still in dispute, but in that century,
the community at Rome held one of its famous councils and made a
definite decision by selecting December 25, or midnight of December
24, as the true time. And in this decision we find a very beautiful and
important mystical story.
It must be understood by my readers that the many facts revealed in
this book which are different from the authorized Christian versions
of the life of Jesus are not facts which were concealed during the early
Christian days, but were known to all of the leaders of the Christian
church and to the high ecclesiastical authorities who gathered in
councils from time to time and established the doctrines, traditions,
and forms of ceremony to be officially a part of the Christian
theology. What motives these early authorities had for disregarding
facts known to them, and for withholding from the masses certain
facts of intense interest to us at the present time, and in changing
other facts to symbolical falsehoods, must be left to the intuition of
my readers. The popular statement that “the end justifies the means”
was unquestionably one of the thoughts in their minds.
We find in the writings of these early authorities a statement made
many times that certain changes and inventions which they established
in connection with the traditions of the life of Jesus were “theological
necessities.” In other words, in order to utilize many of the ancient,
mystical ceremonies which church authorities derived from the temples
of Egypt and from the doctrines and practices of the Essenes and the
G.W.B., they had to invent certain points and principles in connection
with the life and work of Jesus so as to make these ceremonies
adaptable and consistent. In order to establish a new theology and
many new doctrines, they had to ignore and set aside many facts which
would have been inconsistent with their decisions.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 72 —
When, however, it came to some important points that had to be
definitely decided, they were forced to rely upon the ancient principles
and doctrines that had been established and were known to the true
spiritual laws so that they would have some foundation upon which to
base their decisions. The decision that midnight of December 24 was the
actual birth time of Jesus was one such case, and the reason for this
is intensely interesting from a mystical point of view. This decision,
however, conflicted with one of the points in the traditional story of
his birth, namely, the story that at the time of the birth shepherds were in
the field caring for their flocks. It has always been said by those who knew
the conditions in Palestine at that time that the latter part of December
is not a season when shepherds are in the fields caring for their flocks
at night or at any other hour of the day, and that this incident was
introduced in the story when the belief was common that Jesus was
born in the month of April or May.
However, the great fact which the church leaders had to take into
consideration in reaching their decision was that throughout all the
preceding centuries, all the other great avatars who had been born of
virgins, who were Sons of God, and who were known as Redeemers
or Saviors, had been born on or about December 25. The other fact
that they could not fail to consider was that there was a spiritual law
or a cosmic law for the birth of these great avatars on December 25,
and that no Redeemer of the world could have been born at any other
time.
We must bear in mind that the birth of a great avatar or a Son of
God is not a simple incident in the scheme of things, nor a casual
accident of conditions. The birth of an avatar is the result of certain
laws preordained and established in the cosmic scheme and coincident
with a series of events leading up to and culminating in the Divine Birth.
The cosmic birth of Jesus, as of every other avatar, is an interesting
story in itself and has no place in this chapter. But in order that my
reader may be familiar with the manifestations of this great cosmic
law, I will present the following facts from the historical records of
the G.W.B.
In the first place, there is a correspondence between the spiritual
law, cosmic law, and mundane law pertaining to a universal condition
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 73 —
manifesting about December 23, 24, or 25 of each year. It is at this
time that a cosmic change occurs called the Birth of the God Sol, and
this event was always celebrated by the ancients as the Accouchement
of the Queen of Heaven or the Celestial Virgin of the Sphere.
In India this period was one of great rejoicing everywhere. Many
centuries before the Christian era, this period in December was
celebrated as a religious festival, at which time the people decorated their
homes with garlands and they were prolific in their gifts and presents to
friends and relatives. So far back in antiquity can this religious festival
in December be traced that its origin is lost in obscurity.
In China, also, long before the Christian period, the people
recognized this period of the winter solstice as a holy time, and on
December 24 or 25 they closed all their shops, their courts, and their
places of business activities. Among the ancient Persians, their most
splendid ceremonials were in honor of Mithras, whose birthday was
recorded as having occurred on December 25.
Among the ancient Egyptians for many centuries, December 25
was celebrated as the birthday of several of their gods. We find this
referred to in all of the histories of the religions of ancient peoples,
as, for instance, in the book entitled Religion of the Ancient Greeks, by De
Septehenes, who says: “The ancient Egyptians fixed the pregnancy of
Isis (the Queen of Heaven and the virgin mother of the Savior Horus)
on the last days of March and towards the end of December they
placed the commemoration of her delivery.”
In some cases the celebration of the birth dates of some of these
ancient gods was changed by high proclamation, just as the birth
date of Jesus was changed from May to December. The birth date
celebration of Krishna is now held in July or August.
In Bonwicks Egyptian Belief we find a verification of what is contained
in the Rosicrucian records. He says in regard to Horus: “He is the great
god— loved of Heaven. His birth was one of the greatest mysteries of
the Egyptian religion. Pictures representing it appeared on the walls of
temples. One passed through the holy adytum to the still more sacred
quarters of the temple known as the birthplace of Horus. He was
presumably the child of deity. At Christmas time, or that answering to
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 74 —
our festival, his image was brought out of that sanctuary with peculiar
ceremonies, as the image of the infant Bambino is still brought out and
exhibited in Rome.”
The Christian figure of the Bambino, or the Christ child. It is this form
carved in marble or stone that is exposed in the churches on Christmas
morning and kept on view from Christmas to Epiphany. It is claimed
that Saint Francis of Assisi was the originator of this statue in the 13th
century, but research has revealed that a similar statue of a Holy Child
was exhibited on Christmas Day in many lands before the Christian era.
It is interesting to note here that the word Bambino is now a
sacred word among the foreign Christians, and it is a term used for
representations of the infant Christ Jesus in swaddling clothes. It is
customary in Rome to bring out to public view, early on Christmas
morning, an image of the Bambino carried with great ceremony for
the public to salute and greet, in honor of the original birthday. This
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 75 —
little incident of Roman Christian ceremony is just a continuation of
the ancient customs established in the mystic lands by the G.W.B.
Osiris, son of the holy virgin, or Neith, was born on December 25;
and the Greeks celebrated this day as the birthday of Hercules. Bacchus
and Adonis were also born on December 25. Tertullian, Jerome, and
other founders of the early Christian church, who labored so diligently
in the formation of Christian doctrines, ceremonies, and creeds,
inform us in their early writings that the ceremony of the celebration
of the birthday of Adonis on December 25 took place in a cave and
that the cave in which they celebrated this mystery was in Bethlehem,
and was, in fact, the same cave in which the child Jesus was born. This
is but another verification of the fact that the Essenian grotto in which
the Holy Child of Mary and Joseph was born had been used for the
celebration of previous avatars, such as Adonis. This is why the magi
knew where to find the new avatar on his birthday.
The fact that December 25 was celebrated generally as a day
associated with the birth of Sol, or the cosmic birthday of certain
laws and principles manifested by the Sun, is shown in many ancient
records of the early Christian celebrations in Rome. We can turn to the
writings of the Reverend Mr. Gross, who has written very thoroughly
and authentically in regard to these matters, and read as follows: “In
Rome, before the time of Christ, a festival was observed on the 25th
of December, under the name of Natalis Solis Invicti (birthday of
Sol, the Invincible). It was a day of universal rejoicing illustrated by
illuminations and public games. All public business was suspended,
declarations of war and criminal executions were postponed, friends
made presents to one another, and the slaves were indulged with great
liberties.”
It is interesting to note, also, that among the ancient Germans
centuries before the birth of Christ, these people celebrated annually,
at the time of the winter solstice, a sacred period which they called
their Yule-feast. On this occasion all agreements were renewed, the gods
were consulted as to the future, sacrifices were made to the various
gods, and the people indulged in jovial hospitality. Of this ancient
ceremony the word Yule still survives as the old name for Christmas,
and the ancient custom of burning the Yule log on Christmas Eve is
still the usual practice.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 76 —
It is interesting to note also that the word Yule in French is called
Noel, which is the equivalent of the Hebrew or Chaldee word Nule.
Among the ancient Scandinavians there was a yearly celebration at the
winter solstice that was observed as the mother-night, and the feast was
called Jul. It was in honor of Freyr, the Holy Son of the supreme god
and goddess. The celebration included all sorts of demonstrations of
joy and happiness, and the bestowing of gifts.
In Great Britain and Ireland the Druids celebrated December 25
as a holy day and burned great fires and lights on the tops of hills.
Even in ancient Mexico, the last week of December was celebrated as
a sacred feast, in honor of the birth of a god.
The use of evergreens and mistletoe at Christmas time is derived
from ancient practices. Tertullian, the early church leader to whom
I referred previously, writing from a distant land to his colleagues at
home, described this custom of December 25 and the use of evergreens
and mistletoe. Saying that it was “rank idolatry,” he described how the
natives of this region decked their doors “with garlands of flowers and
evergreens.”
From the foregoing we see that when the G.W.B. in Egypt set down
in its records the statement that the day and hour of the winter solstice
was the cosmic period for the birth of avatars, as observed in all the
ancient notations, it was not ordaining a time or arbitrarily establishing
by decree a period for the celebration of the birthdays, but was merely
proclaiming what it had observed and proceeded to state how the
cosmic law had made itself manifest. Just why avatars should be born
in the winter solstice, and why so many of humanity’s great leaders were
actually born at such a time, is a matter that deals with the principles of
reincarnation, cosmic cycles of existence, and cosmic laws relative to
the periodicity of the stages of advancing civilization. Such points as
these have no place in the present volume.
Of course, those who are interested in the profound mystical
principles and spiritual laws of the universe, and who are anxious to
know just how these affect every man and woman in his or her personal
development and attunement with the Cosmic Consciousness, will
make contact with some school or system which deals with these
subjects thoroughly, conscientiously, and without bias or prejudice.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 77 —
Naturally such information is never sold and never put into book
form for public sale at any price. For this reason the seekers will vainly
search among bookstores or in the offerings of private publishers
or commercial movements for the information desired. Only such
organizations as the Rosicrucians, for instance, or branches of the
G.W.B. operating in foreign lands, will give the seeker this information
in a private, personal way, and with no other motive than the benefit
that each individual will derive from the instruction, if he or she is
found worthy to have such knowledge.
— 78 —
Chapter 8
THE CHILDHOOD OF JESUS
WE FIND TWO periods in the authorized Christian version of the life of Jesus which are passed over without comment and without detail. These are the years constituting his childhood and up to and including his appearance before the learned authorities in the synagogue, and the period from that time until the beginning of his mission in the Holy Land as an adult.
The silence in Christian literature regarding these two periods has unquestionably been responsible for a great many discussions that have led to severe criticism of the entire story of his life. Aside from the orthodox version of his birth, which so many reject because they do not understand it, the two gaps in the story of his life referred to above have constituted excellent reasons for the rejection of the story of the remainder of his life. Those who cannot accept the immaculate conception and divine birth of Jesus do not hesitate to point out the two gaps in the early part of his life as proof that the real story of the life of Jesus has never been told.
The highest critics of the authorized version of the life of Jesus point out with some justification that if the biblical accounts did not go into such detail and put such great stress upon the events of his conception and birth, the absence of details regarding his childhood and youth would be immaterial and would cast no reflection upon the entire story of the latter part of his life. But when every important and casual event leading up to his birth, and the events of the birth itself,
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 79 —
are recorded by so many witnesses and glorified in such detail, there
appears to be some significance in the silence regarding his youth.
Surely those who felt it their duty to gather, record, and preserve the
essential and nonessential points regarding the birth, and all that led
up to it, must have had access to the facts pertaining to his childhood,
and these facts must have been more definitely recorded and better
known to a larger number of persons than the events pertaining to the
conception and birth of Jesus. Why, then, the silence and the complete
absence of those details which would have been highly interesting and
extremely illuminating to those who would adore Jesus and seek to
worship every phase of his life?
Be it known, therefore, that the facts regarding the childhood and
youth of Jesus are not lacking and are not absent in those records
which were kept and are still preserved by those groups of persons
and organizations which have not been influenced by the rulings of
religious councils or the dictates of synods and who do not find in
those facts any event or any incident belittling to the greatness and
supreme mastership of Jesus the Christ.
I am aware that some of the facts pertaining to the childhood and
youth of Jesus have become public in various lands at various times
and that some of these facts have found their way into the mystical
writings of the Occidental world. But the complete story and the most
important details have been withheld by those organizations who
know them well in the belief that until the Western world was ready
to understand them in their richness and illuminating significance,
it would be better to withhold them. There is no reason why these
facts should not be revealed at this time, and I am glad to say that the
authorities who have the records in their archives, and with whom I
have recently held consultations in this regard, agree that the present
recklessness throughout the Western world in regard to religious
matters, and especially the desire on the part of so many millions of
persons for a more complete outline of the life of Jesus, warrants the
publication of the facts now given for the first time in Western sacred
literature.
That Jesus must have had some unusual preparation and very
thorough education is quite apparent to any student of Christian
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 80 —
doctrines and to every analyst of the life of this great teacher. The mere
fact that at an early age he could astound the learned of his country
by his ability to answer and ask profound questions proves that during
the first ten or more years of his life, he was carefully educated and
carefully trained. We may assume with perfect reason and logic that as
a Son of God or a messenger of God, he was inspired continuously
and could find in his immediate contact with the Consciousness of
God the illuminating thoughts which he expressed. But with the same
reasonable logic, we must believe that he had to receive that education
and training in the mundane schools of this world, which would make it
possible for him to express those ideas and those thoughts in the words
and tongue, in the images and pictures, understood by the multitude.
The greatest of the masters in an have undoubtedly painted their
masterpieces under inspiration. Nevertheless, each of these masters
had to be trained in the technique of expressing that inspiration in a
medium that would convey the thought, the idea, the picture, from one
mind to another. The greatest of the composers have unquestionably
written under inspiration, and by their own admission they have found
that the most beautiful passages in their music came to them as from
Heaven; nevertheless, these artists had to be trained in the technique
of expressing that which was inspired within their souls.
No matter how completely and perfectly Jesus may have been in
spiritual contact with the Cosmic Mind and with the Consciousness of
God, he had to have that training, that education, and that practice in
the use of words and in the expression of thought which enabled him
to say the most beautiful things in the most beautiful language ever
spoken. We cannot conceive of an uneducated, untrained, unprepared
instrument speaking such thoughts and doing such things as he did,
even under the most perfect inspirational contact, without preparation
and training.
The argument that any such training and preparation in mundane
schools and at the hands of earthly advisers, instructors, and guardians
would weaken the claim of divine preparation and unique Sonship,
is absolutely absurd. Have we any reason to believe that the mother
of Jesus did not teach the little child to walk or to eat? Or shall we
assume that these things were divinely inspired in him, and that from
the moment of birth such things were known to him? After all, is
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 81 —
not the matter of walking upright, instead of crawling about, a matter
of earthly wisdom and regulation, and not a rule of the Cosmic or
an establishment of God, which God would inspire in the minds or
consciousness of all beings? Is not the use of certain words, of certain
languages, and the grouping of these words into grammatical phrases,
a result of human regulations and rules rather than cosmic laws and
principles? If these things are earthly products, then they must be
acquired at the hands of humans and must be taught by humans.
Most certainly Jesus was taught to speak the Hebrew, the Aramaic,
and the Greek languages, for we cannot conceive of God’s having
inspired the knowledge of these languages in the consciousness of
Jesus without earthly education. For why should these three languages
have been selected by God as the modes of expression on the part of
one who was to be a Redeemer of all peoples in all lands, with many
tongues? If Jesus was taught how to speak and teach several languages,
with the ability to interpret the inspiration of his soul into sounds
and words that would convey meaning to others, there is no reason
to believe that he was not taught other things necessary to carry out
his great mission in life. All this is for the purpose of presenting the
logic and reasonableness of his education, and not for the purpose of
attempting to prove that he must have had such education. There are
ample records to show how and where he was educated, and we will deal
with these at this time.
In the first place, I have already shown that Jesus was born in the
family of two devout Essenes and in a community of Essenes. This
in itself was sufficient to guarantee the young child the very highest
education obtainable in any land at that time. Not only were the
preparatory schools conducted by the Essenes sufficient to give every
child an excellent education at the hands of teachers and masters who
had been trained in many lands and raised to the highest degree of
ethical and literary attainments, but the associations and connections
which the Essenes maintained with their other branches in foreign
lands guaranteed a very liberal education to this special Son of God
and this special charge of the Essenian community.
We are told in the accounts of his birth how the magi, who were the
learned individuals of the mystery temples and the chief instructors
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 82 —
of the highest principles of education, came to the birthplace of Jesus
to pay homage to him as the preordained avatar of the new cycle. This
acknowledgment on the part of the great magi indicates that the little
child was anticipated and expected by the Essenes and by the Great
White Lodge in all lands, and that he would be guided and protected
throughout his life. To assume that these magi paid such homage
and adoration to one whom they knew to be the great and expected
leader of humanity, and then did not show any further interest in
his education, development, and training, and played no part in the
development of his life, is to assume something that would be more
of a mystery than any other phase of the life of Jesus as it appears in
the authorized Christian version.
I have said that at the time of the birth of Jesus, the Essenes
constituted a large community in Galilee, and that they had hospices
and refuge houses in various parts of Palestine for the care of the poor
and needy. They also maintained the Supreme Temple in distant Egypt
and minor temples in Palestine and other places. I must point out
now one other fact that has been held in secrecy for many centuries,
and that will probably explain many strange references in the sacred
literature of the Christians and other sects.
The Nazarenes, the Nazarites, and the Essenes had united their
interests in regard to one essential work—a work that is referred to by
many authorities in religious and sacred histories and encyclopedias as
being one of the common interests which bound the Nazarenes, the
Nazarites, and the Essenes. This work was the maintenance of a great
school, college, and monastery on Mount Carmel. The introduction of
this historical place into the life of Jesus may seem surprising to a great
many of my readers. For this reason a brief resume of the history of
Mount Carmel may be not only appropriate, but of value to those who
wish to make further research in this regard.
Just when Mount Carmel became the secret, sacred place for the
maintenance of an isolated, protected school of mystics and of the
G.W.B. is not definitely known. The earliest historical incidents of a
religious nature connected with Mount Carmel are those associated
with the lives of Elijah and his son. The ancient Jewish documents,
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 83 —
as well as many of the writings preserved by the Roman Catholic
Church, which in later years became greatly interested in the Mount
of Carmel, show that from the earliest known period of the history
of this Mount, a tabernacle, monastery, or temple of some kind was
located there, and that when Elijah went to this mountain to carry out
the many marvelous things recorded of him, he found a temple and
an altar there. We also know, from references in various records, that
many of the great masters of the G.W.B. spent part of their lives on
this mountain in the temple or monastery.
Even Pythagoras spent part of his life there, and in the history of
his life this retreat of Mount Carmel is referred to as “sacred above
all mountains and forbidden of access to the vulgar.” We find even in
the Roman Catholic records, which have traced the history of Mount
Carmel very carefully, references to the fact that “in ancient times the
sacredness of Carmel seems to have been known to other nations
besides Israel; thus in the list of places conquered by the Egyptian
King, Thothmes the Third, there is a probable reference at Number
48 to the ‘Holy Headland’ of Carmel.” Those who are students of
Rosicrucian history know that Thothmes III was one of the great
founders of the early mystery schools of Egypt and a leader in the
movement that became the G.W.B. The Rosicrucian records also point
out that Thothmes III conquered Carmel in the year 1449 B.C. and
released it to those who sought to maintain in this out-of-the-way
place a school and monastery for the mystery teachings.
Now it is well known that Elijah was a Nazarite and an Essene, and
that both the Jewish and Roman Catholic records refer to him as such.
This one fact alone would be sufficient to indicate the nature of the
demonstrations which Elijah performed on Mount Carmel and the
nature of the monastery and temple maintained on the summit of the
mountain.
In many of the old stichometrical lists and writings and papers of
the ancient ecclesiastical writers, mention appeared of an apocryphal
Apocalypse of Elias, from which some citations are said to be found
in I Corinthians 2:9, and elsewhere in the Bible. This old book or
Apocalypse of Elias was known to the mystics of the G.W.B. and is
known to all of the Oriental Rosicrucians as a very sacred record of
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 84 —
the early history and teachings of the Essenes and the Nazarenes. In
the early Christian centuries and during the lifetime of the Master
Jesus, the Apocalypse of Elias was well known and used in the sacred
classes of the most advanced members of the organization. But like
many other very valuable and illuminating records of early periods
dealing with the more secret teachings, it was withdrawn from public
use and became “lost.”
However, in 1893, Maspero, the famous historical writer, connected
with the Rosicrucian Order of Egypt, found a Coptic translation
of it in one of the Order’s monasteries in Upper Egypt. Since then
several other translations in other languages have been discovered
in the archives of the G.W.B., and parts of these have been used in
the recently issued higher teachings of the Rosicrucians. From this
Apocalypse of Elias and from the other Rosicrucian records, we learn
much about the establishment of the monasteries and schools at
Carmel, which were known as “the school of the prophets” or “the
school of the Essenes.”
As years passed by, the attendance at the school and monastery
at Carmel became so large that a community was established there,
composed of those who were students. They adopted a distinct form
of dress and remained within the monastery grounds throughout their
entire lives except for the periods when they went forth to other lands
as missionaries. It was here that many of the most ancient manuscripts
were translated and illuminated on parchment and sent to the various
archives of the G.W.B. throughout the world. A wonderful library
was also maintained at Carmel for many centuries. Members of this
community were present at Saint Peters first sermon on Pentecost,
and they built a chapel in honor of this occasion. Many other historical
structures existed there, such as El-Khadr, the school of the prophets;
El-Muhraka, the traditional spot of Elias’s sacrifice; Elias’s Grotto; and
the monastery itself.
About 400 years after the Christian period, the monastery and
school at Mount Carmel were abandoned as the principal place of
education for the G.W.B. The wonderful library and the thousands of
manuscripts and records were transferred to the secret monastery of
Tibet, where these things are now preserved, and where the greatest
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 85 —
school of mysticism and sacred literature in the world is maintained.
Some centuries after this abandonment, an order of a monkish nature
was established in Carmel, and the members of this organization
claimed to be descendants of those of the original organization, but
likewise claimed to be Roman Catholic in faith. This contention caused
much dispute for several centuries, and it was finally settled when Pope
Innocent XII in 1698 decided that the claim of direct succession was
not correct and that the new organization had no connection with the
early Carmelite organization. Out of this decision grew the present
organization known as the Carmelites, or White Friars, as they are
called in England, which is a Roman Catholic organization popularly
known as the Carmelite Order. Today in the midst of the ruins of the
ancient Essenian structure can be seen the Roman Catholic convent of
the Carmelite organization.
According to the Rosicrucian records, we find that in the sixth year
of his life, the youthful Jesus was placed in the school at Carmel and
began his preparation and training as a Son of God and an avatar.
There is no question about the authenticity of this statement. It is
recorded in too many places and in too many different ways, and it
is verified by so many later incidents in his life, that any question of
this fact cannot be reasonably raised. The records further intimate
that while he was an apt and perhaps unusually bright student, he was
given every special advantage that the entire organization, not only in
Palestine, but in Egypt as well, could give to one that was known to be
their special charge and the greatest among them. It is also recorded
that young Jesus was not entered in the school under the name of Jesus,
but under the name of Joseph, and this presents another interesting
fact for those who desire the most intimate details of his life.
It is commonly believed by biblical students that the name of Jesus
was given to the child at the time of his circumcision, in accordance
with the custom of the land. This is based upon the fact that he was
called Jesus later in his life, and that before his birth it was said that
his name would be or should be Jesus. The Gospel of St. Luke tells
us the familiar story of how an angel appeared to Mary and told her
that the unborn child would be called Jesus. But this statement and
that in Matthew are really prophecies. They say simply that Mary shall
bring forth a child who shall be known as Jesus. In the historical record
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 86 —
presented in Chapter 5 of this book, we find that Mary was told that
the “holy life which shall be born to thee, shall be called the Son of
God, and he shall attain the name of Jesus.”
Nowhere in the Christian Bible do we find the statement that he
should be christened Jesus at the time of the circumcision, but we
do find reference to such naming at his circumcision in the Gospel
of the Infancy of Jesus. But these statements were added to these
gospels on the presumption that the name he bore later in life was the
name that was given to him at circumcision. The Gospels were written
long after the lifetime of Jesus, and they contained similar assumptions
and inferences without foundation. From the time that the disciples
knew Jesus or came in contact with him, until the close of his life, he
was known as Jesus and bore that name. Since they never knew him
or contacted him before he bore that name, they had no reason to
believe that he ever had any other name. The fact that such a name was
predicted for him, and that he eventually attained such a name, causes
us to investigate the meaning of the name Jesus.
We know that the word Christ comes from the Greek word
Christos which means “Messiah.” We find that the word Christos was
introduced to other nations when the Septuagint was prepared about
100 B.C., and that it was used to translate the word Mashiach, which
means “the anointed one,” or, in its more complete form, Meschiach,
meaning “Yahvehs Anointed.” Cyrus is called “the anointed,” and in
Psalm 105:15, the plural form “anointed ones” is used to apply to the
patriarchs. In the Old Testament, the word “anointed” is limited to
mean a Jewish king, except in the case of Cyrus and the patriarchs,
which exceptions prove that it could mean a person great in more ways
than one. The word or title Christos had been used in the mystery schools
and in the Orient for the name and title of many of the former avatars.
Going back to the Septuagint, we find that the Greek word Christos
originally came from the name of one of the Egyptian deities. There
was old Hermes, whose name has been corrupted or translated into
“Hiram of Tyre,” who built the temple without the noise of axe or
hammer. The Latin form of this name is Mercury, while the Greek
form is Hermes, and the Egyptian form was Tachut. Now in Hebrew,
the word Tachath, which is called Thoth occasionally in Greek, means
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 87 —
“under” and “beneath.” Thoth was the Lord or God of Maa, or the
Egyptian Maa or Maat, meaning “truth.” And Maa kHeru, meaning
“true words” is the basis from which came the Greek form Merkury
or Mercury.
The Egyptian letter or diphthong kH is a highly aspirated H and
by the Greeks is usually transcribed as X and, vice versa, the value of
the Greek X is usually transcribed as ch. The kHeru of the Egyptians
would be therefore cheru or Ch-R. These latter letters form the famous
XR or the cryptogram of the early Christians, which I personally saw
and traced on several stones of the tombs in the catacombs of Rome.
It is generally accepted in all Christian historical records that this XP
referred to Christ, and in the Greek Gospel of John, Jesus is called the
Logos, which is a word having a similar meaning. Therefore, we see that
the term Christ was a tide to be specifically applied to and attained by
one who had been especially born and deified as a messenger of God.
Now the word Jesus presents the same understanding. The old
Hebrew form of the word as found in the Old Testament is Joshua, or
Jeshua, and was often rendered as Jesu. The Greek form of the name
is responsible for the final s. Originally, the Hebrew form of Joshua
meant “helped of Yahveh,” while the later Hebrew form means “to
deliver” or “to save.” Therefore, Jesus came to be known as meaning
“savior.”
In the Synoptic Gospels we do not find the disciples at first calling
their master by the name of Jesus, but they did call him Rabbi meaning
“teacher” and Adonai meaning “master,” and other titles of respect
and love.
The record of his entrance into the school at Carmel shows that
he was entered as Joseph, the son of Mary and Joseph, and the
reincarnation of Zoroaster, the “Son of God.” When and how he
attained the name of Jesus is explained in another part of this work.
— 88 —
Chapter 9
JESUS ENTERS THE PRIESTHOOD
THE ONE DEFINITE comment made on the early life of Jesus in the popular stories of his life, especially those of churchly origin, tells about the wonderful impression which the child made upon the learned doctors and masters at the time of his visit to Jerusalem in his thirteenth year. Even among the most advanced of Christian theologians and in nearly all of the extensive histories of his life, the real facts pertaining to this visit to Jerusalem are misunderstood or misrepresented through a lack of knowledge of what actually occurred.
I have already said that Jesus and his parents lived as Gentiles in the Gentile section of Palestine but had to obey the Jewish customs and regulations of the land. One of these regulations was that in accordance with strict Jewish law, it devolved upon each boy in his thirteenth year to attend one of the feasts at Jerusalem. He had to appear officially under certain conditions and at a certain place for a definite ceremony, and he then became what was called a Son of the Commandment, or of the Torah. The usual time for such a visit was on the first paschal feast after the boy had passed his twelfth birthday.
According to the story, the parents of Jesus took him with their other children in the company of other Nazarenes to Jerusalem. The text of the Christian version seems to indicate that it was “their wont to go” up to the temple. This is evidently a mistake on the part of the writers or translators, because as Gentiles, the parents of Jesus
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 89 —
were not accustomed to attending all of the feasts and ceremonies of
the Jewish church, for the law did not require that of any but those
who were strictly orthodox and wholeheartedly affiliated with the
Jewish religion. Since Jesus was the first born of the children in the
family and, therefore, the oldest, he was the only one of the children
of Mary and Joseph who had attained the age when such visits were
compulsory, and so this must have been their first obedience to this law
of the land. I find that even some of the highest critics of Christian
literature agree that the phrase “it was their wont” to go, should be
read in that sense which puts the participle in the present tense and
not in the past. Hence we understand how glad Mary and Joseph were
to avail themselves of this opportunity to visit the Holy Sanctuary in
Jerusalem and to bring their wonderful child before those officials who
would conduct a formal examination.
This paschal feast in Jerusalem was held in the spring. Caponius was
acting as procurator and Annas ruled in the temple as high priest. Out
of Galilee walked this holy family, accompanied by a host of other
Gentiles, Nazarenes, Nazarites, Essenes, and some Jews, chanting as
they went and making of the event a gala occasion. The ranks of these
travelers were swelled by other festive bands who united in chanting the
Psalms of Ascent to the accompaniment of the flute. Unquestionably
they also discussed the spiritual principles involved in the ceremonies
to be held.
It was a long journey as we would view it in these days. Recently I
made the trip in a very fast automobile from Nazareth to Jerusalem,
and I found that it required the better part of a day to do it. All through
the beautiful section of Palestine which these pilgrims had to traverse,
composed of hills and valleys, magnificently tinted with the beautiful
green of that country and spotted with flowers, one could still see the
ancient trail of footpaths that led up over the hills and down into the
valleys in almost a straight line from the present site called Nazareth
to Jerusalem and over which the pilgrims walked in their journeys to
and fro. Even today the natives of that country walk these same paths
or ride on their donkeys garbed as in the times of Christ, presenting a
picture that carries one back hundreds of years.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 90 —
When the tired pilgrims finally reached the gates of Jerusalem, the
problem of being housed and cared for must have been a serious
matter, for the feast brought nearly the entire population of Palestine
into the environs of Jerusalem for three or four days. The Essenes,
Nazarites, and Nazarenes were fortunate inasmuch as at the city gate,
and in places nearby, there were special houses and structures owned
by the Essenes and Nazarenes for the care of their own people and for
pilgrims and strangers who needed their care.
The scene must have been a glorious one for the youthful child,
making perhaps the first long trip in his life. The school at Carmel is
but a short distance from the villages of Galilee, as compared with the
long distance that stretches between them and Jerusalem, and we may
easily realize how impressed the child must have been with the sight
of so many pilgrims, the chanting, the music of the flute, the wayside
prayers, the excitement, and finally the greetings and preparations at
the city gate.
So little has been told about the Temple and Sanctuary where Jesus
attended the feast that perhaps a few words about this place will be
of interest to my readers. As the pilgrims reached the place of the
Temple, they found it necessary to ascend a mount crested by beautiful
buildings symmetrically proportioned and gigantic enough to hold
within their walls not fewer than 200,000 persons. The mount on
which the structures stood rose abruptly from out of the valley, much
like an island that rises out of the sea. And around it, in the greenness
of the valley, was a mass of walls, palaces, houses, and streets reflecting
the bright sunlight from the snowy marble and glittering gold. About
1,000 square feet of the mount was occupied by the Sanctuary and
Temple. At the northwestern angle and connected with the main
structure was the Castle of Antonia held by the Roman garrison. The
lofty walls were pierced by massive gates. One unused gate known as
the Tedi was on the north; on the east was the Susa Gate which opened
on the arched roadway to the Mount of Olives. There were also the
two Huldah Gates, which led by tunnels from the priest-suburb Ophel
into the outer court. On the west were four other gates.
Within the gates the court was surrounded by double colonnades
with benches here and there for those who resorted to prayer, or for
conferences. The southern double colonnades, with a wide space
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 91 —
between, were the most magnificent. The eastern colonnade was the
most venerable, and was known as the ancient Solomons Porch. Entering
the court from the bridge under the Tower of John, the pilgrim would
pass along the southern colonnade to the eastern extremity over which
rose a tower known as the Pinnacle, that is referred to in the history
of the Temptation. From this lofty pinnacle, the priests each morning
watched and announced the sunrise, and 450 feet beneath this tower
yawned the Kedron Valley. Within these colonnaded areas were the
meeting places of the first and lowest of the three sanhedrins, known
as the Temple; the second or intermediate court of appeal usually held
in what was called the Court of the Priests; and the highest of the
courts known as the Great Sanhedrin, which was often referred to as
the Hall of Hewn Square Stones.
Passing out of the colonnades and porches, one would enter the
court of the Gentiles, or what the Jews called the Mount of the House,
which was the widest on the west side. This was called the chol, or
profane place, to which the Gentiles retired during the feast, and it
was here also that the marketplace was located for the sale of various
needful articles, along with the money changers. Beyond this Gentile
section was a wall which marked a space beyond which no Gentile
or person not strictly orthodox might proceed. Thus, the Gentiles—
which included the Essenes, Nazarites, Nazarenes, and those who had
not adopted the Jewish faith completely— had to assemble in a special
place set aside for them.
The Sanctuary itself was on a higher terrace than the Court of the
Priests. Twelve steps led up to its porch, and here in separate chambers
was kept all that was necessary for the sacrificial services. A two-leaved
gate opened into the Sanctuary which was divided into two parts. The
holy place had the golden candlestick in the south, and the table of
the Shewbread in the north, with the golden altar of incense between
them. The mystical Veil referred to so often in the ceremonies of the
mystery temples of Egypt, from which the Veil in the Jewish sanctuary
was derived, concealed the entrance to the most Holy Place, which
was an empty place in the Temple containing nothing but the piece
of rock, the Eben Shethiyah, or foundation stone, which, according to
tradition, covered the mouth of the pit, and on which the world was
founded.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 92 —
These few details cannot give an adequate idea of the vastness of
the temple buildings, for all around the Sanctuary and colonnaded
courts were various chambers and outbuildings which served different
purposes connected with the services.
It was in the Gentile section of the entire enclosure that Joseph
and his parents along with the others of their class assembled. It was
necessary for the Gentiles to be present only for the first two days of
the feast. On the third day, therefore, were held the special ceremonies
for the strictly orthodox. Thus, for the rest of those in attendance,
the third and following days were so-called half-holy days when it was
lawful for all in attendance to return home if need be. It was at this
time that Joseph was brought before the learned doctors immediately
after the ceremony for examination and questioning. Undoubtedly
there were many other children of his age present on this occasion,
and undoubtedly the questioning was the same for all of them. Yet
we are told that the answers which Joseph gave provoked intense
interest in him, and that after the usual questions had been asked of
all the children, and the parents and children had proceeded on their
way, young Joseph was retained for further questioning and a special
examination.
We are told in old records that on the last days of the feast, and when
the actual feast itself had been celebrated and the usual ceremonies
completed, it was customary for the doctors of the Temple-Sanhedrin
to come out upon the terrace of the Temple and there preach or discuss
certain doctrines and conduct a forum, or ask questions of those in
whom they were especially interested. It was in such an audience as
this, out on the terrace and informally conducted, that Joseph was
found after his parents had started on their way home with their other
children and missed him, according to the Christian version of the
story.
As I have intimated, there was nothing extraordinary about the fact
that one or more children had been retained by the doctors for special
examination. Many writers of the life of Jesus, and many Christian
authorities who have analyzed this incident in his life, have attempted
to speculate upon the nature of the questions and answers which
brought Jesus to the attention of these doctors. Some of them seem
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 93 —
to have come to the conclusion that Jesus was taking part in one of
the usual scientific classes designated as Kallah, at which time not only
the doctors but the most analytical of the Jewish scholars discussed the
doctrines, practices, customs, and habits of the Jewish religion. Such
sessions required considerable preparation on the part of the lecturing
rabbis or doctors and considerable Talmudic knowledge on the part
of the attendants.
Many of these discussions dealt with the establishment of new rules
and regulations, as well as the authoritative interpretation of Jewish
rules. For instance, the great Hillel took part in a discussion in this
court regarding the propriety of offering the Passover on the sabbath.
By his great logic he proved that it was appropriate to do so and was
honored for his services in this regard. It is hardly to be believed that
the youthful Joseph could or would participate in such discussions as
were common to the Kallah, even if the learned doctors had considered
him old enough or wise enough to be present. Furthermore, the fact
that Joseph was a Gentile, and not of the strictly orthodox faith,
would have prevented him from participating in this class. And there
is another consideration: these classes were held in the last month of
summer (Elul) before the feast of the new year, and in the last winter
month (Adar) immediately before the feast of the Passover, but it was
in the spring that Joseph attended the paschal feast.
Another speculation on the part of some theological writers is to
the effect that perhaps the parents of Joseph, realizing that the boy
was about to enter into a new cycle of his life, informed him regarding
his divine birth and Sonship and that he in turn presented these facts
to the learned doctors at the temple and discussed the important
principles involved. This explanation is more unsound than any other,
for the simple reason that the young man was on his way to the Temple
in obedience to a law which definitely outlined the procedure and the
purpose of the occasion. Thus, it would have availed him nothing to
have argued in behalf of his special appointment from on high. It is
very doubtful, indeed, if the doctors assembled at the court would
have permitted him to make any plea or explanation in behalf of his
own divine place in life, and certainly they would not have set aside
other tasks to listen to any such unique presentation.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 94 —
We can thoroughly understand just what did happen when we
examine the facts in the case and reenact the entire scene. The youths
of Palestine were called upon to come to the Temple in their thirteenth
year in order to partake of the paschal feast, and thereby acknowledge
obedience to the Jewish religious law. It was a purely formal registration
intended to supply the church with a complete list of those who had
attained that age where they could be counted as of the faith or out
of it. It was natural, therefore, that before being permitted to partake
of the feast, every youngster was questioned in a categorical manner,
being asked a list of questions, which would reveal the religious faith
and ideas of each applicant. These questions had been asked for many
years and were considered a standard catechism. The catechism for
Gentiles was different from that used for those who were strictly
orthodox and born in the faith. In other words, the questions asked
of those who were assembled in the Gentile section of the court
were quite different from those asked of the youths assembled in the
orthodox section.
Our records indicate that Joseph had been somewhat prepared by
his education at Carmel and by his contact with the orthodox Jews to
answer the questions that would be asked of a Gentile registrant at
the feast. It was the belief that only such questions would be asked of
him as were asked of other youths, and that he would answer them
in proper manner, that made his parents leave their child alone in the
class for youths while they went into an adjoining building where adult
Gentiles were given a different examination preparatory to participating
formally in the paschal feast. It was probably the plan that after young
Joseph had finished his examination and had entered the Sanctuary
along with the other youths in the Gentile class, he would meet his
parents out in the general court and proceed with them on their return.
According to the story, the parents proceeded homeward with their
other children and with a large band of others who were returning
to Galilee, and it was not until they were halfway home that they
discovered that young Joseph was not in the large party of pilgrims.
The fact that his absence was not noticed during the first pan of the
trip plainly indicates that young Joseph was relied upon to take care of
himself and to look after his own interests, and that the parents were
more concerned with the care of the younger members of the family.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 95 —
That young Joseph was well educated, unusually alert of mind,
and in every sense well prepared to take care of himself is not only
indicated by this incident but by what actually happened in Jerusalem.
It is recorded that during the formal examination, while young Joseph
was answering the categorical questions put to all of the youths, he gave
explanations concerning some doctrinal points that involved a new
angle, a broader insight, and a higher idealism regarding the mystical
side of the theological points. This so surprised the learned doctors
that they asked young Joseph to remain after the class had completed
its work and after they had all partaken of the paschal feast. He was
then called before a group of learned doctors of the Great Sanhedrin
and further questioned, and he was then requested to remain within the
temple grounds until the following day, when he would be interviewed
by a court composed of the highest officials, high priests, and learned
teachers. It was here that young Joseph was found on the third day.
According to the records, I find that young Joseph did not put any
particular emphasis upon his divine appointment as a Messenger of
God, nor refer in any particular manner to the preordained mission
of his life. He did reveal the fact that he was a special student of the
Essenes at Mount Carmel, and that it was his intention to carry out the
plans of the organization and visit the higher schools of instruction in
foreign lands, including the academy and mystery school at Heliopolis.
What this may have indicated to the minds of the learned Jewish
doctors is not definitely stated. One question put to young Joseph does
indicate that they immediately suspected him of being a selected leader
for the future work of his community. However, this in itself would
not have aroused any curiosity or particular interest on the part of
these doctors, and evidently it did not antagonize them, inasmuch as
they did not express any idea regarding young Joseph’s apparent refusal
to do otherwise than accept merely the formal commandment making him
an adopted Jew of the country.
Their surprise and keen interest centered around the unusual insight
that young Joseph had regarding religious, theological, and mystical
principles, and his very clear exposition of spiritual laws. For this
reason they were amazed at his “combinative insight,” or unusual
spiritual intelligence, and “discerning answers.” If young Joseph had
revealed to these doctors some of the principles taught by the Essenes
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 96 —
and was the apt student which the organization records in its reports,
then he must have astounded these doctors who were learned only in
the traditional teachings of their own faith and unaccustomed to the
newer and higher ideas taught in the Essenian schools.
Young Joseph did reveal, however, in very positive terms, that in
a few months he would finish the preliminary courses of instruction
at the school at Carmel, and that in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the organization, he would leave Galilee early in the fall
to go to the schools in foreign lands, and that he would not return to
Palestine for many years. Thus he explained his reasons for not doing
more than formally obeying the command to appear for registration
and not promising to attend the synagogues regularly or becoming a
true disciple of the Jewish faith. The fact that he had been circumcised
made him potentially a Jew so far as fundamental preparation for
admission into the Jewish faith as a Gentile was concerned, but there
was no way by which the Jewish clerics could force this young man, or
any other of the Gentile youths, to become an orthodox follower of
the Jewish religion.
Young Joseph was not the first ambitious youth of the country who
had gone to Egypt and other lands to acquire a higher education or to
make more successful contacts with the larger things in life, and the
fact of his determination to travel for the betterment of his education
did not cause any surprise in the minds of these doctors. However,
his entire attitude and the free and easy manner in which he spoke
of his plans did surprise these authorities who were accustomed to
having the youths of the land show them greater consideration and
less independence.
So when the parents of young Joseph found him sitting in the midst
of a group of learned doctors and succeeded in calling him aside
and reminded him of their concern and sorrow when they missed
him, he may have made the reply which Christian literature has made
very famous, and which our records do not reveal at all. But if he did
say that he had been very busy attending to his Fathers business, we
can understand that he was referring to the entire scheme of his life.
Certainly he must have felt that he was about his Father’s business
when he was making plain to his inquisitors the nature of his beliefs
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 97 —
and convictions, the reason for his contemplated journeys to other
lands, and his inability to become a devout attendant at the synagogues
in Palestine.
After young Joseph and his parents returned to their home village,
he was sent again to the school on Mount Carmel, there to live and
finish his term of preliminary instruction.
— 98 —
Chapter 10
JESUS ENTERS THE SECRET PRIESTHOOD
LITTLE IS INTIMATED in the Christian Gospels about the life of Jesus between the time of his appearance before the learned doctors in Jerusalem and the beginning of his mission in Palestine. In fact, the first revelation regarding the preparation of Jesus for his work as a Son of God is in connection with his baptism in the River Jordan. We are told that at this time Jesus came out of Galilee and permitted himself to be known to the public.
Certainly the baptism of Jesus could not have been the beginning of his preparation for the ministry; and most certainly more preparation than this was required to carry on the work which he efficiently conducted for so many years. I have intimated in previous parts of this book why it is unreasonable to believe that Jesus required no preparation for his ministry, and I have tried to show that his whole life demonstrated deep study, careful preparation, and unusual guidance during his youth.
We now approach a period in his life that is not only interesting because it is generally unknown to the students of Christian doctrines, but is highly significant in the light of the work which he accomplished during his lifetime.
According to the Essenian records, young Joseph completed his official schooling early in the fall, when he was still in his thirteenth year. With all of his precociousness and brilliant mind, he was not
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 99 —
permitted to shorten the usual period of study and preparation in the
School of the Prophets at Carmel. Therefore, we must presume that
he was given careful attention and tutored by those who added such
special subjects to his instructions as would have kept him engaged in
his attainment of knowledge until the prescribed time had come for
his transfer to other teachers and other schools.
The records also outline very clearly and definitely the incidents of
his life from the time of the transfer from Carmel until he was ready
for his great mission. The details of these incidents in his life are too
exhaustive and unimportant to present in toto in a book of this size and
character, but the essential points and the interesting incidents may be
outlined as follows:
According to the instructions sent to the school at Carmel from the
Supreme Temple at Heliopolis, the young avatar was to complete his
education by a thorough study of the ancient religions and teachings
of the various sects and creeds most influential in the development of
civilization. In other words, he was to become familiar with the tenets
of the so-called heathen religions before taking up the study of the
development of the pagan beliefs and rites into the higher principles
and creeds taught in the mystery schools of Egypt.
In modern times, students preparing for the ministry must become
familiar with comparative religions, but they are able to do this in
great universities, where the sacred books and writings of the ancient
religions are expounded, analyzed, and carefully digested before the
modern forms of theology are undertaken. Students do not have to
leave their own lands and journey into distant places in order to contact
and become acquainted with the ancient religions or schools of ethics.
In the time of which I am writing, however, it was considered
absolutely necessary for students of religion or philosophy to journey
to the very seat of each of the ancient religions, where they might
have access to copies of the authentic versions of each religion and
an opportunity to live among the people, thus becoming intimately
acquainted with the rituals, rites, and practices of the tenets. Many of
the great avatars in the past had journeyed to distant places for this
purpose, and it was in this way that knowledge of the various ancient
teachings had become universally disseminated.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 100 —
So young Joseph was placed in the charge of two magi, who came
to Carmel for the purpose of conducting the youth to his first distant
school and place of experience. The records show that Joseph was
permitted to spend about a week with his parents in Galilee, while
the magi made their preparations and held various consultations with
the officials at the Carmel school. They also instructed the parents
of Joseph as to what they should expect and what they should do in
his absence. The records further state that when Joseph and the magi
started from Galilee, a special ceremony of the Essenes was held in one
of their small assembly places. Then, without attracting unnecessary
attention, the magi and the boy proceeded with a number of others
who were going a short distance of the way, in a caravan, by the
shortest route to Jagannath. This city was located on the east coast of
India, and its present-day name is Puri. It had been the center of pure
Buddhism for many centuries; and on a mountain near the outlying
districts of the town there was a monastery or school containing many
of the ancient Buddhist writings and the most learned instructors
of Buddhas doctrines. It required nearly a year for the magi, young
Joseph, and others, who joined the caravan en route, to reach this point
in India, while the magi continued to instruct Joseph. During their
many trials and tribulations they pointed out to him the sufferings of
humanity, the weaknesses and strengths of the peoples ideals, and the
popular fallacies of the day.
According to the records, young Joseph remained a little over a
year in this monastery school and became thoroughly familiar with
the ancient teachings and the evolved rituals of the Buddhist faith.
The principal teacher of young Joseph at this time was one known
as Lamaas, to whom young Joseph took such a great liking that later
in his life he sent for Lamaas to come and unite with the Essenes in
Palestine.
When it came time for young Joseph to leave the monastery
at Jagannath, visits were made to the valley of the Ganges with a
several months’s stop at Benares. We must bear in mind that the great
monastery and world headquarters of the G.W.B. had not yet been
established at a spot in Tibet; for if it had been, Joseph and his magi
would have undoubtedly proceeded to this place and remained there
for a considerable time. In Benares, young Joseph had an opportunity
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 101 —
to pursue the study of ethics, natural law, languages, and similar
subjects constituting the offerings of several of the great schools there
which were renowned for their culture and learning. It was in Benares
that young Joseph became greatly interested in the Hindu method
of healing, and he took a short course in the Hindu principles under
Udraka, who was reputed to be the greatest of the Hindu healers.
After a visit to other parts of India, merely for the purpose of
contacting the art, law, and culture of the peoples, Joseph returned to
the monastery at Jagannath, where he remained for two more years.
His advancement in the subjects being taught was such that he was
appointed a teacher in a small town called Katak, and this gave him
his first opportunity to become familiar with the art of teaching or
instructing by the use of parables or stories.
As a result of his contact with eminent teachers and the learned
of Benares, young Joseph was visited by a high priest from Lahore. It
appears from the records that he had already introduced new ideas and
truly mystical principles in his discourses and instructions to children,
and these appealed to the most learned of his hearers, but aroused the
antagonism of the unlearned and strictly orthodox Hindus. Therefore,
early in his life he learned what it meant to have enemies as well as
followers. The high priest from Lahore tried to persuade young Joseph
to change his teachings slightly and at the same time cease his journeys
among the lower castes and common people. Here was Joseph’s first
temptation to hold himself aloof from the common touch and to
change his attitude so as to appeal to the aristocracy and the influential.
However, young Joseph refused to listen to the petitions of the high
priests, and he even refused to accept gifts that were offered.
It was while he was thus drinking the bitter draughts of life, that
Joseph received the sad news that his father in Galilee had passed on,
and that his mother was grieving, and none was able to comfort her.
Messengers informed him that no word had come from him and that
his mother was unable to learn of his whereabouts. Even though she
had been informed by the Essenes that silence on the part of young
Joseph had been predicted, and that he was safe, she could not be
consoled. It was at this time that young Joseph expressed himself
for the first time in definite words, which were recorded and are still
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 102 —
preserved. According to the several translations of the message which
he sent by the Essenian messengers to his mother, it read as follows:
Beloved mother: Be not grieved, for all is well for father as with you. He has
completed his present work here on earth and has done so nobly. None in any
walk of life can charge him with deceit, dishonesty, nor wrong intention. In
his period of life here he has completed many great tasks and is gone from
our midst truly prepared to solve the problems that await him in the future.
Our God, the Father of all of us, is with him now as [God] was with him
heretofore; but even now the Heavenly Hosts guard his footsteps and protect
him on his way. Therefore, why should you weep and suffer? Tears will not
conquer your grief, and your sorrow cannot be vanquished by any emotion of
your heart or mind.
Let your soul be busy in meditation and contact with him who is gone, and if
thou art not idle, there will be no time for grief. When grief throbs through
the heart, and anguish causes you pain, permit yourself to rise to higher
planes and indulge in the ministry of love. Your ministry has always been
that of love, and in the brotherhood thou canst find many opportunities to
answer the call of the world for more love. Therefore, let the past remain the
past. Rise above the cares of earthly things and give your life to those who
still live with us here on earth. When your life is done, you will find it again
in the morning sun, or even in the evening dew, as in the song of birds, the
perfume of the flowers, and the mystic lights of the stars at night. For it will
not be long before your problems and toils here on earth will be solved also,
and when all is counted and arranged you will be ready for greater fields of
effort and prepared to solve the greater problems of the soul. Try then, to be
content until I come to you soon and bring to you richer gifts than any that
you have ever seen and greater than those made of gold or precious stones. I
am sure that my brothers will care for you and supply your needs, and I am
always with you in mind and spirit.
Your son, Joseph
This letter and other writings, written during the years which followed
and which have been carefully preserved and recorded, plainly indicate
the rapid development of his mind and the marvelous comprehension
he had of cosmic laws and principles.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 103 —
It is stated in some ancient records that after Joseph had completed
the studies of the Buddhistic teachings and the Hindu doctrines in
India, he journeyed to Lhasa in Tibet. While still in India, a messenger
came to Joseph with some manuscripts from a Buddhist temple in
Lhasa, sent by Mengtse, who was considered the greatest of all the
Buddhist sages. For a considerable period messengers from Lhasa
brought manuscripts to young Joseph, and it was this intercourse and
the effects it had upon his life that may have caused him to journey to
Lhasa personally. However, when Joseph was ready to leave Jagannath,
his journey took him westward toward Persia, where, in the city of
Persepolis, arrangements had been made for his further studies. This
was one of the ancient cities of the kings and the center of the learned
magi of that country who were known as Hor, Lun, and Mer. One of
these magi, a very old man, was one of the three who had visited the
infant at the time of his birth in the Essenian grotto and had brought
to him gifts from the monastery of Persia.
Great homage was paid to Joseph by these magi and by the priests of
the temple. Other learned individuals from various sections of Persia
came to Persepolis and remained there as instructors and students
during the time of Joseph’s education. It is even recorded that at the
close of each day when the instructors had finished the day’s lesson,
they asked Joseph to become their teacher and inform them of the
higher principles which he seemed to comprehend through inspiration.
It was here that Joseph finally made plain to the elders that the
greatest instruction he had to give was that which he had obtained in
the silence after meditating upon some important law given to him
in the course of his reading and studying. Thus, Joseph established a
system of entering the silence which became an important feature in later
mystical methods. It was in this city, also, that Joseph demonstrated
considerable healing power. After months of analysis of the power
within his being and a careful study of the principles involved, he
revealed to his elders his belief that the faith or mental attitude and
attunement on the part of the patients had a considerable effect upon
the results. This laid the foundation for the later teachings of the secret
conclaves of the disciples of Jesus—inner or psychic attunement and mental
preparations are necessary in all forms of spiritual healing.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 104 —
After a year spent in Persia, Joseph and his guides proceeded to
the Euphrates. Here he contacted the greatest sages of Assyria as
well as magi from other lands who came to see him and hear him
speak; for he had already attracted great attention as an interpreter of
the spiritual laws in a more understandable, mystical manner. Joseph
spent considerable time in the cities and towns of Chaldea and in the
lands between the Tigris and the Euphrates. His healing powers and
methods were becoming so rapidly perfected that it is recorded that
multitudes in these lands were benefited by his methods. It was also
about this time that the magi who were his guides informed him that
the development of the ability to heal would be one of the tests in his
final examination of preparedness for his ultimate mission.
From this country Joseph and the guides journeyed through the
ruined Babylon, and spent some time in examining the fallen temples,
ruined gates, and the empty palaces. It was here that he became
familiar with the trials and tribulations of the early tribes of Israel
when they were held in captivity in Babylon, and he saw where Daniel
and the Hebrew children had experienced their great tests. He was
unquestionably impressed with the sins of pagans and the error of
ancient beliefs.
Then Joseph and his guides journeyed to Greece, where he came in
contact with some of the Athenian philosophers. He was under the
personal direction and care of Apollonius, who opened up the ancient
records of Grecian lore for him. In this country Joseph attracted
unusual attention among the wise and the magi, and they implored him
to remain a long time; but his itinerary had been definitely decided upon,
and in a few months he sailed from Grecian shores for Alexandria.
He stayed but a short time at Alexandria, just long enough to visit
some of the ancient shrines and to be entertained by the special
messengers who went there to greet him. He was taken immediately
thereafter to the city of Heliopolis and settled in a private home
specially arranged for him. He had several servants, a beautiful garden,
and a personal attendant whose records as a scribe would place him
today in the category of a personal secretary.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 105 —
Very shortly after his arrival in Heliopolis, Jesus was approached
by representatives of the pagan priesthood of Egypt, who had heard
of his teachings and his demonstrations of mystical power and
disapproved of them. Once again he learned to drink of the bitters of
life through many trials and tribulations which would have tempted the
average person to accede to the advice of the priesthood and resort to
hypocrisy and deceit in regard to his purposes and intentions.
It was at this point in his life that Joseph began his preparatory
initiations for the entrance into the higher grades of the G.W.B. I will
treat these in my next chapter, for the details are worthy of complete
presentation.
— 106 —
Chapter 11
JESUS ATTAINS MASTERSHIP
IN ORDER TO understand the advancement of Jesus through the various grades of the priesthood leading to mastership, it is necessary to explain the operation of the G.W.B. in which he became an initiate.
The G.W.B. referred to so often in the preceding chapters was a nonsectarian organization formed in a primitive way by the ancestors of Amenhotep IV, pharaoh of Egypt, who became better known in philosophical literature as Akhnaton. We do not definitely know which of these ancestors was the first to proclaim the foundation of the organization, but we do know that Thothmes III established many of the important rules and regulations for the conduct of the organization, and that these regulations were in effect for many centuries.
In one of the Rosicrucian records, we find that at the close of his reign as pharaoh of Egypt in 1447 B.C., there were thirty nine men and women constituting the high council of the secret organization. The council meetings were held in one of the halls of the temple at Karnak in Luxor where Thothmes III had erected two obelisks on which were carved the famous cartouche which became the seal of the G.W.B. and which is used in Egypt and America today as the seal of the organization known as the Rosicrucian Order. In establishing this cartouche as the seal of the organization, we find the following words written in the record in regard to its use: “In testimony of the great work of our teacher (Master) to be forever a mark of honor and loyalty.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 107 —
The son and grandson of Thothmes III sponsored the continuation
of the secret group and permitted it to increase in size and activity. In
1378 B.C., was born Akhnaton, the great-grandson of Thothmes III.
He became the great reorganizer and founder of the present rules and
regulations of the worldwide organization known as the G.W.B., which
developed out of the secret organization established in ancient times.
The original plan of the secret organization was to bring the wisest
men and women in Egypt together, and especially the most advanced
of the magi, for the purpose of discussing, analyzing, recording, and
preserving the great knowledge that constituted the light of the world.
Egypt had become the center of the world’s culture and scientific
knowledge, as is attested by the remarkable attainments made by her
people under the leadership of the learned individuals in the sciences
generally. To Egypt came students from all parts of the world, to
obtain the highest education and to contact the mystery schools, as
they were called, under the direction of this secret society.
Akhnaton was the reincarnation of one of the previous great avatars
and became what historians call the world’s first great individual. He,
too, had a great message for the world, and during his short lifetime he
accomplished more for the advancement of philosophy, religion, and
ethics than any individual preceding him. It was he who began a very
strenuous attack upon the heathen priesthoods of Egypt which held
the masses in slavery, and it was he who established the world’s first
monotheistic religion, for Akhnaton declared that there were not many
gods, but only One, “the ever living, sole God.” In his doctrines, which
he introduced into the G.W.B., he laid the foundation for the presentday
monotheism and for most of the doctrines and creeds used in the
Christian and Hebrew religions.
It was while Akhnaton was pharaoh that the children of Israel dwelt
in Egypt and the leaders of those tribes became initiates of the G.W.B.
It was also at this time that Moses, as one of the initiates, became
acquainted with the fundamentals of the religion which he afterward
modified to present to those who followed him out of Egypt into
Palestine. It was also to Akhnaton that Moses made his appeal for aid
in taking the tribes of Israel out of Egypt, and it was through the aid
thus given by Akhnaton and by the G.W.B. in secrecy that the tribes of
Israel evaded the heathen priesthood and had a safe journey.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 108 —
As stated in an earlier part of this book, branches of the G.W.B.
were established under various names in many parts of the world
during the first ten centuries before Christ. The original body of
members in Egypt became the international council or supreme body
maintaining the name of the G.W.B. and eventually adopting the rose
cross emblem as their esoteric symbol. But the branches established
in various parts of the world were permitted to adopt such names as
were significant in the various languages or symbolical to the peoples
with whom they had to deal. Thus it was that a large branch formed
at Heliopolis adopted the name of Essenes, which name was later used
by the followers in the northern part of Palestine; whereas in Greece
the name of Therapeutae was used, and other names in other places. All
these branches, however, used the same seals and symbols, adhered
to the same general rules and regulations, and paid allegiance to the
supreme body known as the G.W.B. in Egypt.
Out of the organizations monasteries, schools, and temples, and its
branches, came most of the famous philosophers, teachers, priests,
and avatars of the future. Today we find that in the branches of the
organization known as the Rosicrucian Order, which name has become
practically the exclusive worldly name for the organization, there are
students in preparation for the ministry, for positions as teachers and
professors in colleges, those who are to become eminent physicians in
various schools of therapeutics, including medicine and surgery, and
those who are also preparing for research work in the various fields of
science. We also find in the membership, hundreds of thousands of
men and women who are students of the teachings of the Rosicrucian
Order, because of the personal benefit they derive and the assistance
the organization gives them through private teachings and instruction
for the betterment of their living, the attainment of personal evolution,
and the awakening of those latent or dormant faculties which enable
them to achieve the highest degree of success and happiness in their
individual careers.
Therefore, it was natural that the new avatar should be one of this
organization, as had been most of the avatars in preceding centuries.
It was also perfectly logical and reasonable for this young Son of God
to have his footsteps directed toward the organizations great schools
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 109 —
and teachers in Egypt, where he might complete his preparations and
receive his final instructions before entering upon his divine mission.
Before initiates of the G.W.B. could go out into the world and
proclaim the doctrines and teachings which would enlighten civilization
and bring about the gradual evolution of humanity, they had to be
tested and tried in such ways as would not only prove to the entire
organization their worthiness, but would also make them familiar with
the tests and trials they would inevitably face during their mission.
Thus we find Joseph now at the threshold of his final preparation
and ready for the symbolical tests and initiations leading to the degree
and attainment of mastership which would qualify him to go out into
the world and fulfill the mission for which he had been cosmically and
divinely ordained.
When Jesus was ready for his entrance into the organization’s
supreme college and monastery at Heliopolis, he found that the
first requirement called for three months of meditation, prayer, and
study in the quiet of his own home, during which time many of the
organizations eminent masters would contact him in the cosmic or
psychic sense, through mental processes.
The records show that he was surrounded, as we have stated, with
every comfort and convenience, and for his study he was given many
of the rarest manuscripts containing the texts of ancient doctrines
and creeds. Then came the first of the tests. It is stated that one
night at the midnight hour, a door in his chamber was opened, and a
priest in Oriental garb came to Joseph and pleaded with him that he
abandon his intention of staying in Egypt and receiving the authority
of the G.W.B., because his mission and plans were antagonistic to the
priesthood of Egypt, and the priesthood was plotting to take his life
or to imprison him.
The priest offered various methods whereby Joseph might secretly
and easily leave Egypt and return safely to Palestine. Young Joseph had
seen many evidences of the enmity which his presence in Egypt had
aroused, and as I have said before, he was drinking of the bitter cup.
For this reason the pleading and offering of the priest were certainly
tempting. But young Joseph absolutely refused to abandon his plans
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 110 —
or to change his decision. Joseph summed up his argument with this
statement: “I shall not bargain with deceit, nor sell my soul for the
safety of my body. I shall deceive no one, and I will be no partner of
hypocrisy. Return to your people and tell them that I shall remain true
to God and to myself.”
His decision was reported to the organizations high authorities, and
Joseph was commanded to appear before them. Then the hierophant
placed his hand on Joseph’s head and gave him a scroll on which was
written just one word, Sincerity. Joseph knew that this had been a test
of his sincerity and that he had yielded not to temptation.
Some weeks later another messenger called upon Joseph in his
home and presented a very interesting story. This messenger claimed
that he had at one time been in the same position as Joseph, and he
had suffered all the trials and enmity of the priesthood of Egypt
while remaining steadfast in his determination to become a master.
He claimed that he had attained high degrees in the organization and
had finally been admitted to their great ceremonies and to their secret
conclaves. But then he had found that all of the work was corruption
and that their rites were sacrificial, in which innocent children, women,
men, and animals were burned as offerings to false gods. He had finally
escaped and now urged Joseph to think well of the future and to stop
before it was too late.
When Joseph questioned him as to how he had gained access to his
chamber, the man replied that as a trusted priest of the organization
he knew of passageways and doors that permitted him to enter any of
the organizations structures. Joseph then accused the man of being
a traitor and said that he would refuse to listen to one whose hands
were not clean and who could not show a higher purpose than he had
shown. The man disappeared, and again Joseph was brought before
the hierophant who once more placed his hand upon Josephs head
and handed a scroll to him which contained but one word, Justice. And
Joseph learned that this was another test and that he had passed it
successfully.
About a month later, another priest approached him one afternoon,
when he was in the midst of meditation in the quietness of his sanctum.
This priest began to comment on the grandeur and richness of the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 111 —
rooms in which Joseph dwelt, and he called the attention of Joseph
to the fact that the great teachers in Egypt had undoubtedly provided
these luxurious surroundings for Joseph because to them Joseph was
the greatest of them all, and that the healing Joseph had accomplished
in foreign lands, the wonderful interpretation he had given in answer
to questions asked in India and Persia had proved that he was the
greatest philosopher, the greatest mystic, and the greatest teacher in
all the world.
Therefore, he urged that Joseph should not submit to the dictates of
the G.W.B., but go out into the world at once and organize a priesthood
of his own which would overthrow all others and bring triumphant
victory to him personally. It is recorded that this man made eloquent
pleas to young Joseph and pointed out to him the rosy path to fame and
popular acclaim, bringing to him wealth, honor, and unlimited power.
The man left the presence of Joseph at the psychological moment of
his beautiful presentation, and for many days Joseph wrestled with the
idea that had been implanted in his mind. But always there came from
within the voice of the Divine Self pointing out clearly the duty for
which he had been cosmically ordained.
Finally Joseph sent a message to the man and stated that he was
thankful for the contest that had raged within him and for the victory
which had come to the better self, and that he wanted not glory, fame,
nor wealth, but only an opportunity to serve and to keep the faith while
life was in his body. Once again he was called before the hierophant,
and this time a scroll was handed to him upon which was written the
one word, Faith. And Joseph learned that this was another test of his
faith and that he had passed it successfully.
Thus Joseph completed the first of the three preliminary degrees
of initiation, which were really degrees of test and trial, before being
admitted into the organizations important fourth degree. Having
passed these tests, and further examinations which were held before
the conclave of high priests, he was finally honored with the title of
Master and admitted into the highest circle as a duly prepared and
qualified Master of the G.W.B.
This title of Master was always used by the Essenes in speaking of
Jesus throughout his entire ministry, when the conversations dealt with
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 112 —
his public affairs or reference was made in general conversation aside
from any of his special activities as a divine Son of God. The title of
Master was also used by many of the Jews who greatly admired Jesus
for his work among them and especially for the valuable instructions
which he gave. It was always reverently used by those who understood
its real meaning, just as it is reverently used by the Rosicrucians today
when they speak of the Great Master Jesus.
— 113 —
Chapter 12
JESUS ATTAINS CHRISTHOOD
HAVING ATTAINED THE degree of Mastership in the G.W.B. placed Joseph among the most learned of the high priests and second only to the hierophant of the organization. This entitled him to attend the highest conclaves, to have access to the most sacred and sublime ceremonies, to indulge in the transcendental experiences at certain cosmic periods of the year, and to attune himself by the highest spiritual laws with the Consciousness of God.
It may be argued that since Jesus was divinely ordained, divinely conceived, and divinely born, and predetermined to be the Son of God and the Savior of the world, that no earthly power and certainly no earthly council could either grant or fail to grant him the privilege of such attunement with the Consciousness of God. This is unquestionably true. Nowhere in the records with which I am dealing and nowhere in the present-day teachings of the Rosicrucians is it intimated that if Jesus had not passed through the preparation and experiences outlined by the G.W.B., he would have been unable to attune himself just as completely with the Divine Consciousness or become conscious of the Godhood or Christhood within him.
From the very hour of his birth all of the magi, high priests, and most learned advisers of the organization were his inferiors in divine attunement and soul preparation for the great mission. It was no presumption on the part of these great leaders to perform their time-honored duty of accepting Joseph as a neophyte and giving him
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 114 —
every one of the tests and trials and offering him every opportunity
for development as had been offered to the greatest among them. Nor
did Joseph himself consider the attitude assumed by the organization
in treating him as a neophyte, and as one who had to be prepared, a
failure of recognition, on their part, of his superior position among
them. We shall see later on that even after Joseph had completed all
the preparation that the organization prescribed for him, and they had
acknowledged him ready for his mission in life, he voluntarily offered
himself for a final act of preparation in the knowledge that all these
things were necessary for the work he desired to accomplish and which
had been cosmically planned for him.
Naturally, I wish it were possible for me to outline here the further
initiations, ceremonies, and steps of preparation through which Joseph
passed during the years in which he remained in Egypt. These things
are never revealed to those who are not high initiates; and Jesus himself,
during his entire mission, revealed them to no one but his apostles,
whom he carefully selected and whom he constituted as his sacred
council and initiated as he had been initiated. I hardly think that any
of my readers expect these things to be published in any book of this
kind or in any book for the general public; and I am sure that the most
learned and reasonable of my readers would doubt the authenticity of
any printed record which claimed to contain such details.
It is possible, however, to speak of the last and final stage of his
preparation for the ministry, which was held in the chambers of the
Great Pyramid now known as the Pyramid of Cheops.
Much has been said in various books and magazine articles in recent
years about the chambers and secret rooms of the Great Pyramid, and
space in this volume does not permit even a brief explanation of the
intricate arrangement of the passageways and ancient chambers that
are built within and beneath this great structure. The average tourist
to Egypt sees the several pyramids that are grouped almost as a unit
just outside of Cairo and close to the famous Sphinx. These tourists
are generally told that the Great Pyramid was built as a tomb, and
that it is a solid structure built over a burial chamber. Even the most
ingenious of the guides who escort the tourists to the pyramids refuse
to admit that there are secret chambers and ceremonial rooms within
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 115 —
this unique building. However, during my recent visit to the Pyramid,
and while in the company of several high officers of the Rosicrucian
Order of Egypt and a number of officers of the Order in America,
we were permitted to enter these secret rooms and to verify the facts
contained in our records.
It may be surprising to my readers to know that in the ancient
times, or in the times with which we are dealing, the entrance way to
the principal ceremonial rooms of the Pyramid was not through any
doorways in the Pyramid itself, but through a secret passageway built
between the two huge paws of the Sphinx. These paws rest upon a
high foundation wall, forming two sides of a court in front of the
Sphinx, in the center of which stood an altar. Back of this altar, still
partly in ruins, and just beneath the breast of the Sphinx, was the
well-guarded, secret doorway, opening only by application of certain
secret contrivances which only a few knew. It led under the sands and
the foundation walls of the Pyramid to long subterranean passageways
under the Sphinx and to the great reception hall far below the surface
surrounding the Pyramid.
It was to the outer court in front of the Sphinx that the neophytes
who were well prepared and deemed worthy of the secret of the
entrance way to the Pyramids were brought and given their first
induction into the mysteries of the higher degrees. Such ceremonies
usually occurred at midnight, when the neophytes and the few who
conducted the outer-court ceremony wended their way separately to
this sacred spot, guarded and protected by trusted sisters and brothers
who remained at distant points from the Sphinx and the Pyramid as
watchers and sentinels. Only those who once actually passed through
the ceremony within the Pyramid knew of the secret entrance way and
the existence of the rooms and passageways.
Joseph was brought before this outer court of the Sphinx and
clothed in purple robes during the preliminary ceremony held at
midnight. At the completion of the ceremony, he was escorted
through the subterranean passageway to the reception room beneath
the Pyramid. After further ceremony here in this room, the sublime
ceremony of being raised to the highest pinnacle of initiation began.
This was performed by escorting Joseph up various inclines to the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 116 —
several different levels within the Pyramid, on each of which was a
small chamber.
After having reached the highest of these chambers, practically in
the center of the Pyramid, the final ceremony took place. During this
the royal diadem was placed upon the head of Joseph, indicating that
he was no longer a neophyte, nor even a peer among the Masters of
the G.W.B., but the greatest of them all. For over an hour a pontifical
ceremony was conducted, culminating in a period of silence and
meditation while Joseph knelt before the altar. Then a great light filled
the chamber, which was otherwise lighted only by candles and three
torches. A white dove descended in the light and rested on the head
of Joseph while the hierophant rose, and various bells in the chambers
beneath began pealing the great announcement to the world. A slight
figure rising behind the hierophant like an angelic being commanded
Joseph to rise while the voice of this being proclaimed: “This is Jesus
the Christ; arise!” And all within the chamber united in saying “Amen.”
The symbol to the left is called in Christian mysticism the Monogram of
Christ. It is also often used as a symbol of Christianity. The author of
this book traced this monogram on the face of a number of tombs
in the catacombs at Rome and in some of the ancient carvings of
Egypt. Early Christian missionaries were misled by the discovery of this
symbol in foreign lands, and believed it indicated the presence of earlier
Christian missionaries. The symbol was in use long before Christianity
adopted it. It was the original monogram of Osiris. The sacred banner
of Constantine called the Labarum, on which was placed the sign by
which he was to conquer, was inscribed with the sacred monogram.
It was also the mystical sign of Jupiter Ammon. The monogram had
a mystical origin in the mystery teachings of the Egyptian Mystery
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 117 —
Schools, and it has been found engraved on a medal of Ptolemy, king
of Cyrene. An identical monogram was also found on the coins of
Herod the Great, issued before the Christian era. The Roman Catholic
Encyclopedia claims that the X and the P are the first two letters of a
Greek work meaning “Christ.” (The letter R in Greek looks like P; X
is the English Ch.) This authority also admits that the monogram was
used in pre-Christian periods as a mystical emblem. The monogram
composed of X.RN., shown on the right, is another symbol of the title
“Our Lord Jesus Christ.”
The foregoing is but a very brief, greatly condensed outline of
the final ceremony. The complete details present one of the most
picturesque and elaborate settings ever recorded in the organization’s
secret writings, and it is known that no such ceremony has ever
occurred since then.
As the ceremony ended, the officers and members of the high
council surrounded Joseph, who had now attained the name Jesus
and had been acknowledged the Christ, and paid homage to him and
proclaimed him the incarnation of the Word, or the Living Logos. Then
followed the ceremonial march to the chambers below, where the first
of the Lords suppers was held as a symbolical feast.
Messengers were sent the next day, in all directions from Egypt
to every land in which the organizations branches were located, to
proclaim the coming of the Savior and the announcement of his
mission of redemption. Among these was one John from the Essenian
community in Palestine, who had been a student at the schools in Egypt,
preparing for his mission in life. He was known to be the reincarnation
of Elijah, and he was sent to Palestine, the land in which, as Elijah, he
had once before served as an avatar and had attended the monastery
at Carmel. It was his mission, like that of the other messengers sent to
other lands, to proclaim the coming of the Christ.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 118 —
The symbol shown above is often called the Crucified Serpent. We find
in many ancient records a cross of this kind with either a dove, a rose,
the sun, or the serpent on it. The serpentine crucifix represented in this
ancient symbolism the sun after it had lost its power. In some mystical
writings it was used as an emblem of the crucifixion of the Christ to
indicate that through such crucifixion the Son had lost his divine power.
And so all the peoples who were ready for the coming of the Lord
were duly notified, and the great work of Jesus the Christ began.
— 119 —
Chapter 13
THE MYSTIC BEGINNING OF CHRIST’S MISSION
WHEN JOHN REACHED Palestine he appeared in public in the most humble clothing and with great humility. His work was to announce among the lowly and the humble in spirit the coming of the great Redeemer. He presented an entirely new idea inasmuch as he preached the doctrine of baptism for redemption or regeneration.
It may not be out of place here to state that baptism, or the immersion in water and the use of water for purification in a symbolical or cosmic sense, was introduced into the rites and ceremonies of the G.W.B. in Egypt by one who was known as El-Moria. He was one of the great avatars in the organizations early days, and he had learned through meditation and Cosmic Illumination that water would cleanse in a cosmic sense as well as a physical sense. It was through his learned discussions before the organizations high council in this regard that pools of purified water were introduced in front of every altar in the mystery temples of Egypt and other lands.
It was this same great avatar who first introduced public baptism for spiritual regeneration by holding such ceremonies at Lake Moeris, in the Fayum district of Egypt, around which centered one of the earliest of the advanced civilizations of Egypt.
Recently I made a trip to this place in company with others of our Order. There I saw the beautiful lake which is still a mystery to those who have tried to discover the source of its beautiful water, far
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 120 —
from the Nile and in the very heart of desert lands. Here many of
us reenacted in the utmost sublimity the early form of baptism and
symbolically celebrated the ancient rite. According to the records of the
Rosicrucian Order, this is the first time that scores of men and women
united in one reverential party to participate in this ceremonial rite
since the days before Christ, and of course it was the first time in the
history of the world that such a group of persons from America ever
received baptism at the shore of Lake Moeris. For hundreds of years
this beautiful lake has never been visited by European or American
tourists, and for a thousand years its history and its connection with
the Christian rite of baptism has remained unknown except to those
in the Rosicrucian Order and those in the high branches of the G.W.B.
in Tibet, India, and Egypt.
John was looked upon by the Jewish people as one of the sturdy
race of Judah. Since he came from the wilderness into their midst in
pious clothing, they looked upon him as an ascetic. His camel’s hair
cloak was a symbol of penitence, and his words were those of an
ancient prophet. John picked out the banks of the Jordan as his special
territory for the work he wished to do. Appealing, as he intended, to
the lowly and the humble, he attracted the attention of multitudes,
who seemed to drink in his words and find hope in his proclamations.
In selecting the valley of the Jordan, he had chosen a place that
seemed to be separated from the rest of the world and filled with
terrifying contrasts to the rest of Palestine. Around about was the
rough land of volcanic formation and volcanic destruction. In fact, the
part of the shores selected by John was known as the Sea of Solitude,
but it was here that the Essenes had originally held such wonderful
ceremonies and had established one of their first communities. It was
truly holy ground to John.
John’s message was that which most of the Jews had hoped to hear
in their lifetimes—the coming of the Messiah. But he warned them
that they must prepare for this coming and prepare for it in a true
spirit of repentance. His earnestness, and the power with which he
proclaimed that only the repentant, the purified, and those who were
purged of all sin would see the Messiah, shocked the holy ones and
antagonized the strictly orthodox.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 121 —
From all parts of Palestine came those who wanted to hear the
message of John and witness his strange ceremonies in the waters
of the river. About this time word came from other lands that other
prophets were foretelling the coming of the Messiah. Over and over
was repeated the ancient prophecy that out of the land of Egypt would
come the Son of God.
Camps were built around the lake where earnest souls remained for
weeks, many of them hoping that the Messiah would appear in the
midst of the thousands who gathered there on feast days. A number
asked permission to form a group to take up the work of John and to
serve under him in the beginning of a holy war. Rumors of this plan
reached the rulers of Palestine, and the priests at Jerusalem began to
feel uneasy at the excitement of the populace. Other conditions in
Palestine seemed to indicate that a great crisis was at hand. Tiberius, now
seventy-four years of age, was indulging in such debauchery at Capri
as was rapidly hastening his transition. Pontius Pilate was continuing
his persecution of the Jews and becoming more furious. It was in the
midst of these conditions that Jesus the Christ quietly and without
recognition returned to Galilee and greeted his mother, brothers, and
sisters in their little home. He awaited patiently the hour when the first
message was to be given. To Jesus came the reports of the work being
done by John, and how John was insisting that all who were worthy of
regeneration and redemption must be baptized by water. Finally Jesus
decided that he should set the great example among the Gentiles of
Galilee by proceeding to the Jordan and submitting to John’s baptism.
And so it was that Jesus entered the throngs of those standing by
the shores of the Jordan listening to the preachments of John. Here
he heard the voice of John thundering, “Repent ye, prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his path straight.” As he baptized each applicant, he
made his famous prophecy of the coming of the Messiah, saying: “I
baptize you with water only, but he will baptize you with fire.”
Jesus stepped forward, and he and John faced each other for the first
time since they had met in one of the conclaves in Egypt. Instantly
John knew that he was in the presence of the Christ, and he folded
his arms across his chest with the right hand over his heart, and the
left hand over his right breast, making the salutation common among
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 122 —
the Essenes. Jesus replied by making a similar sign. Words passed
between John and Jesus which have been variously recorded, but which
constituted the formal recognition on the part of John that was due
the great Master before him. Then Jesus stepped into the water and
submitted voluntarily to the baptism. As stated in the preceding chapter,
this act clearly shows that Jesus recognized the necessity of formal
preparation and ceremonial procedure, even though he knew of the
divine, cosmic appointment of his Messiahship.
It is one of the important doctrines of the G.W.B. that spiritual
illumination and Cosmic Consciousness enter our being only when we
are ready. There is an ancient belief based upon the mystic teachings
of the Orient that when each individual is ready for the coming of the Master,
who is to guide and instruct her or him in the higher things of life,
the Master will appear. But the emphasis here should be placed upon
readiness, which includes worthiness and sincerity of purpose. Unless
one is truly ready and properly prepared by instruction, guidance, and
the help that lies in the process based upon spiritual laws, no Master
will appear, no bursting of inner Cosmic Consciousness will become
manifest, and no great illumination of transcendental light will come.
Worthiness must be attained, preparedness made manifest, and
readiness earned by voluntary effort.
Just as John was sent ahead to prepare the way, just as the great
avatars of the past found it necessary to preach and teach in order to
prepare the many for spiritual regeneration, and just as Jesus taught
his disciples and hosts of others that they might mentally comprehend
and spiritually apprehend the laws and principles leading to spiritual
awakening, so have the teachers and Masters in the mystery schools
in all lands maintained the systems of instruction and methods of
preparation that have proved to be adequate and efficient. The seeker
for divine effulgence and Cosmic Consciousness who attempts to
await the coming of the Master and the brightness of illumination
without study and preparation, and without association with those who are likewise
qualified to aid and assist, delays the coming of the great day and often
closes the door to the coming of the Master. It is in this fact that
we find warrant for the establishment of the churches and for the
maintenance of the secret orders and societies devoted to the spiritual
preparation of humanity.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 123 —
Another monogram for Christ is that formed of three letters, supposed
to be the first two and last letters of the Greek word for “Jesus,” but
the last letter was finally changed to the Latin letter S so that the I.H.S.
stood for Jesus Hominum Salvator— “Jesus, the Savior of Humanity.” The
letters were also used to mean In Hoc Salus and In Hoc Signo, meaning “In
this Cross is Salvation,” or “By This Sign, Conquer.” The / and J in the
early Latin language were identical in form, and in the early monograms
composed of the letters I.H.S., the mark of abbreviation was put above
the letters. These abbreviation marks were later misunderstood or so
crudely carved that they were considered to be a cross over the H, and
in this wise a new monogram was evolved appearing as shown above,
with the cross resting on the letter H. This monogram is now the official
emblem as adopted by the Jesuits.
So Jesus entered the water and immersed his body in it, while John
stood by ready to give him humble benediction. As Jesus rose erectly
in the water, and before John could speak, a great light came down
from the heavens and surrounded Jesus and remained with him as a
magnificent, blinding aura of iridescent illumination. John stepped back,
more in fear of the brilliancy of the light than through astonishment,
and the multitudes stood aghast, speechless and spellbound by the
sight before their eyes.
Then from out of the heavens there descended a great, white,
luminous dove, as bright as molten silver and as magnificent as the
spiritual light which surrounded the body of Christ. The dove lighted
upon the shoulder of Jesus, and while all stood silent and motionless,
a voice came from the center of their attention, melodious but
resounding like a trumpet call, proclaiming: “This is my beloved Son!”
John knew, as did the other Essenes who were assembled there, that
the Holy Ghost had descended upon Mary, and had created in Jesus a
new being— the divine being of Christhood and Sonship with God—
as it had created in Mary a new being and a Sonship of God.
— 124 —
Chapter 14
HIS REAL DOCTRINES AND MIRACLES
THE WHOLE PUBLIC life of Jesus, from the time of his baptism up to and including the Crucifixion, was an outer, objective manifestation of the series of initiations through which he had passed secretly— or more or less subjectively—during his years of preparation. This important fact is often overlooked by those who are analytical students of his mission and life work, and it is certainly slighted in emphasis by those who attempt to interpret his doctrines, teachings, activities, sufferings, trials, victories, and defeats.
I have intimated in many places, in the preceding chapters, that the fundamental mysticism of Christianity has been unwarrantedly neglected by modern Christianity and churchanity, but it is being reintroduced into Christianity by the foremost theologians and the clergy. At a recent conclave of one of the high Protestant churches of America and England, the statement was made by one of the foremost ecclesiastical authorities that the salvation of the Christian church today depended upon the proper emphasis of the mystical foundation of Christianity.
Pristine Christianity was intended to carry on the teachings and doctrines revealed by Jesus the Christ, and these were highly mystical though reduced to worldly parables. The apostles of Jesus, who were carefully selected by him because of their previous experience in life and their worthiness, were carefully initiated by him and spiritually developed during the secret conclaves which he held, and which never
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 125 —
became a part of the public records of his life. The work that these
apostles carried on, and which was later taken up by the leaders of
the Christian church, was dual in nature. There was the secret or inner
circle of students of Christianity, who were gradually developed in the
mystical principles involved in the doctrines revealed by Jesus; and
there was the outer circle which heard only the parables and preachments
given to the multitudes by Jesus and amplified by his followers.
For many centuries after the life of Jesus the early Christian church
was more of a secret mystery school than a public place or system of
general religious worship. It was not until the conclaves of the church
authorities in the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th centuries, that the presentday
system of churchanity, separate from mystical Christianity, was
adopted. And even so, the few in every land who were deemed worthy
and properly qualified were permitted to enter the little-known inner
circle and bask in the brilliant light of transcendental illumination.
That the outer circle, with its churchanity, had a glorious work to
do is unquestionable, and I do not mean to criticize the plans which
permitted the outer work to grow with greater strength or to a more
enlarged form than the work of the inner circle.
Even today the proportion of those who are ready to enter the
inner circle is so small, as compared with those who are only partially
ready for the broader and more general work of the outer circle, that
it often seems like a hopeless task to make the inner circle sufficiently
large to carry on the great work that must be carried on to retain the
mystical elements of Christianity for future development. I cannot
agree altogether with those who criticize the Church and claim that
system and organization have eaten away the heart of Christianity, or
that outer pomp and ceremony, structure and operations, have denied
any place at all to the mystical work of the inner chamber. Spiritual
development is a matter of evolution, and progressive evolution is
rapid only with the few. The greatest work must be among the masses
in order that the occasional one in every thousand persons may find
the path that leads to the inner circle.
Before Jesus could begin his great work in life, and before he would
lay the foundation of this work by the establishment of his personal
school and personal council, composed of selected neophytes who
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 126 —
would be his trusted apostles, he had to face once again the tests and
trials of higher initiation. This time, however, he would not approach
these things as a neophyte, but as the ordained Christ. And since his
work would be in the objective world, so would his tests, trials, and
initiatory experiences be of the objective world. For this reason, we see
why it was that the first incident of his public career was his retirement
into the silence for meditation.
In a previous part of this book I have referred to this principle of
entering the silence and have commented upon the benefits of silent
meditation. In the books of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, of the Christian
Bible, we find reference to Jesus entering the silence, or going into the
wilderness, whereas nothing is said of it in the Book of John. John
was the most mystical of the writers of the New Testament, and his
gospel emphasizes more of the mystical principles of Christianity than
any of the others. His reason for skipping over the incidents of Jesus’s
meditation in the wilderness is probably because of its personal nature
and because it had no bearing upon the work of Jesus with the public.
Throughout the Christian Bible we find so many references in
both the Old and New Testaments regarding those who went up
on a mountain for illumination or for intimate contact with God or
God’s Consciousness. The proof that these references to mountains of
inspiration or mountains of illumination have not been considered in
their true mystical light is found in the fact that expeditions composed
of scientists and ecclesiastical authorities have sought for many of
these “mountains” in the Holy Land and have labored diligently to
select the proper one to fit the various incidents described in the Bible.
In many cases, the mountains selected have proved to be mere hills,
much like thousands of others to be found in such a rolling country;
and surprise has been expressed by a great many that such places
should have been called mountains at all.
The truth of the matter is that going up onto a mountain for illumination is a
symbolical, mystical statement, indicating no actual, physical mountain
and referring to no physical height at all. We are surprised to find that
the ancients who lived in lands where there were no mountains or even
large hills referred, in their writings, to the illuminations which they
received upon mountaintops. Even some of the early Christians in
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 127 —
Egypt spoke of the illumination which came to them out in the desert
on the mountaintop.
Going up onto a mountain meant, in the mystical terminology of the
G.W.B. and in all of the mystical writings of the avatars and masters of
the past, the raising of one’s inner spiritual self to a great height where
cosmic contact, or Cosmic Consciousness, was definite and complete.
We find that all such experiences in the Old Testament, including the
one regarding Moses and the spiritual contact he made with God, were
for the purpose of attaining spiritual illumination or the development
and test of some spiritual principle. Logically, the very opposite of
this expression was also true. Whenever one of the great mystics or
masters of the past had to contact or come in contest with one of the
earthly, nonspiritual phases of life and wrestle with a problem that was
purely worldly, he went into the valley or into the wilderness, and not to
the mountaintop.
Thus we see why the first incident of the life of Jesus, which
concerned objective principles and earthly trials and tribulations, took
him into the desert wilderness instead of onto a mountaintop. We read
in the Christian writings that he spent forty days and forty nights in
this wilderness. During this time he fasted and hungered, and in other
ways suffered the conditions of the body and flesh.
It is interesting to note that the numbers seven and forty are the
numbers mostly used in mystical literature, because they have a mystical
significance. I will not take the time to recall to my readers the number
of times the number seven is used in the Old and New Testament,
beginning with the creation of the world and the number of days in
the week, and the fact that the seventh day was made the holy day; for
I am sure that a few minutes’s reflection will bring to mind many such
uses of this symbolical number.
The number forty is used so many times that its significance
becomes apparent even to the casual student of the Bible. It is found
very frequently in the most ancient of sacred writings in many lands.
The Egyptians claimed that the body was not completely freed of the
soul until after forty days of preparation. Moses abstained from bread
and water for forty days and forty nights during his period of cosmic
contact. Moses was on the mount for forty days and forty nights, and
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 128 —
he was on Mount Sinai the second time for forty days and forty nights.
Those who went to Canaan were forty days on their spiritual journey.
It was prophesied that no foot of human or beast would pass through
Egypt for forty years.
Elijah was forty days and forty nights on Mount Horeb, and the
same number of days and nights on Mount Carmel. The children of
Israel were in the hands of the Philistines for forty years, and for forty
years the children of Israel ate manna. The people of Nineveh had to
repent for forty days. We find that Saul, David, Solomon, and Joash
reigned as kings for forty years. So we should not be surprised to find
that Jesus went into the wilderness for forty days and forty nights.
We must also remember that both Moses and Elijah began their
public ministrations by fasting for forty days and forty nights, and
preparing for their final acts. In the case of Jesus, however, his first acts
were to be those dealing with material, earthly affairs, while with Moses
and Elijah they were to be of a spiritual nature, dealing with spiritual
problems. Hence, Jesus went into the lowlands of a wilderness while
Moses and Elijah went up on the mountaintop.
We find from the Christian accounts of the experiences of Jesus
during his forty days in the wilderness that it was a period of temptation,
and the story being told symbolically, the temptations of the earth are
personified as coming from the person of Satan. The temptations,
however, through which Jesus had to pass were symbolical of those
presented to him during his initiation in Egypt, when he was being
prepared for the ministry. According to the old records Jesus himself
meditated upon what form of temptations the world would present
to him during his ministry, and one by one these temptations were
stated by himself as though being spoken by the “tempter.” Then
he reviewed the nature of the temptation, analyzed it carefully, and
formulated what answer he would give and what attitude he would
maintain throughout his life, if ever brought face to face with such
temptations.
Therefore, the entire process was one of self-examination; and
it is recorded that the ultimate result of the self-examination and a
consideration of the conditions that Jesus would have to face brought
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 129 —
him to the point where he realized that he would come to the final
close of his career during a public attack upon his methods and life,
culminating in his Crucifixion. Therefore, we understand why Jesus
made prophetic reference a number of times to the sad close of his
life, and why he anticipated and was more or less prepared for what
actually occurred. In truth, he knew that he would not be the first
of the avatars who had been crucified and who had been accused
wrongly by the very people who would have benefited the most from
the instructions and teachings offered.
In fact, we find that as soon as Jesus had completed his forty days
of meditation and self-examination, and had outlined his plans for
his ministry, he learned that John, who had baptized him, was already
in prison because of his missionary work. So we know that Jesus was
aware of the fate that awaited him, and yet it did not deter him nor
discourage him, for all these things were tests of his sincerity.
So Jesus began to preach the doctrine of repentance. This doctrine
was not unique with Jesus, but it was a new form of preachment
for the public in Palestine. El-Moria in Egypt, centuries before, had
introduced the doctrine of regeneration as the reward for repentance,
and it had been a doctrine with the G.W.B. in all lands; but Jesus added
an inspired hope to the hearts and minds of all— “The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand!”
Analyzing all of the doctrines introduced by Jesus, we find that each
and every one of them had a mystical principle as its basis, and these
mystical principles were natural, spiritual laws. Comparing the pristine
doctrines of Christ and the general tone of his message to present-day
Christian doctrines and messages, we find an outstanding difference.
Jesus preached a message of hope which might be expressed in these
words: “Believe in me and my teaching, love and act in love toward
all and let hope be the soul of your deeds, for beyond this present
existence there is a more perfect life to come. I know this, for I have
come therefrom, and thither I will lead you. Aspiration alone will not
serve you. To attain the more perfect life of the future, you must begin
by realizing it now, first by finding it within yourselves, in the Kingdom
of Heaven that is within, then afterwards finding it in humanity through
the acts of love and charity.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 130 —
Present-day doctrines preach a message of despair which must be
phrased briefly in these words: “Ye are all children of evil, born in sin
and living in sin, and in sin shall ye die. The Kingdom of Heaven is
far from thee, and can never be attained except ye are born again and
through regeneration become purified and saved from the sins which
ye have inherited.”
We can understand, then, why the multitudes of Palestine followed
him and found peace and renewed life in his words. Nowhere in the
records of the Order do we find that the miracles of Jesus nor the
wonderful demonstrations of healing which he performed attracted as
much attention or brought as much hope and happiness into the lives
of the public as did his message. Those who are well acquainted with
the principles involved rightfully feel that the present-day emphasis
upon the miraculous healing of Jesus is a mistake, for in his time these
things were but mere incidents and not the objective of his mission,
nor the paramount benefit which he bestowed. His cordial message of
“Come to me, all you that are weary and are carrying heavy burdens,
and I will give you rest,” was one which meant more to the multitudes
than the raising of the dead or the healing of the sick. Think again of
the contentions, the struggles, the bitter disappointments, the blasted
hopes, and the peaceful aspirations of the people of Palestine at this
time, and you will realize what such a message meant to them.
Jesus’s famous Sermon on the Mount represents an image of the
Kingdom of Heaven which he was already bringing into consciousness
in the hearts of the people. Did he require them to do great fasting,
make unusual sacrifices, or suffer public penance? None of these were
recommended by Jesus; he merely said that all should lift up their eyes
and attune their spirits with the new Kingdom. “Blessed are the poor
in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,” was the consolation
that he offered to the downtrodden and those who were forlorn and in
despair. His presentation of the four Beatitudes—the marvelous power
of humility, sorrow for others, the inner goodness of the heart, and
hunger and thirst after righteousness— were the mystical doctrines or
spiritual principles which he taught as being the Way to the Kingdom
of Heaven. And like the sound of a mystic silver bell in the temples of
old, resounded the pure, pristine principle of “Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God!”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 131 —
Even his doctrine of regeneration called for no material, physical
sacrifice as demanded by others who had left the multitudes in
despondency. “... no one can see the kingdom of God without being
born from above,” meant no difficult thing for those who understood
the spiritual, mystical laws involved; for Jesus explained, “Very truly, I
tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God without being born of
water and Spirit.” These words are recorded in the Book of John; for
John was careful to preserve the mystical statements of Jesus, knowing
the importance of this part of the divine messages. Regeneration
by water, rebirth through baptism, and awakening of the Divine
Consciousness within through the Holy Spirit was the Way to the new
Kingdom.
In the G.W.B. and in the Rosicrucian Order of today all of the
doctrines, teachings, thoughts for meditation, and principles for
experience are intended to enable the student to awaken that inner
consciousness and permit the Holy Spirit to bring about the attunement
which leads to the finding of the Holy Kingdom. With the coming
of Cosmic Consciousness, through the awakening of the Holy Spirit,
comes illumination of the mind, peace to the soul and body, power to
the mental faculties, intuition, the healing touch, the ability to master
and accomplish, and the prowess to overcome the earthly, material
obstacles to success and happiness. These are the offerings of the
Order in all lands, and freely are they offered and freely must they be
accepted, in sincerity, and with an open mind. No material price can
be placed upon these things, nor can they be commercialized in books
and public manuscripts. For ages have the Rosicrucians preserved these
teachings and carried on with the divine principles without bias and
without price or prejudice. To the few who are worthy, these things are
accessible. To those who are curious and demand a sign or a symbol,
nothing is shown and nothing is given.
The miracles performed by Jesus were never supernatural in the
sense that they extended beyond the limitations of natural law or
found their manifestation through a unique application of an unusual
law. To the mystics of old and to Jesus, the Master of these things, all
laws were divine laws, all principles were godly, and there was nothing
supernatural, nothing super divine, unique or extraordinary, in what he
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 132 —
did. His power to perform miracles was dual: mental apprehension and
comprehension of the laws involved, with the ability to apply them
properly and direct their operation; and the divine within him which
enabled him efficiently to direct the creative processes of the God
Consciousness in his soul. Half of his power was a divine gift born
in him; the other half, a power developed through study, training, and
experience.
To some degree all men and women are born with the divine power
to perform, and to some degree all men and women may attain the
mental mastership necessary for the application of the divine power.
Jesus himself is the authority for the statement that others could do
the things which he did— even greater things. Great avatars before
him had performed similar miracles, and even today there are those
who heal and who raise those who are literally dead, through the divine
power that is God’s greatest gift to humanity.
Jesus did not teach that so-called death or transition was something
which might be stayed, continually prevented, or completely eliminated
from human life, but that it was an inevitable event in the life of all beings.
In this we see a distinct contradiction of the unsound and unnatural
doctrine that transition may be avoided and life made continuous in
one body. “There is no death!” is true of the real part of humans,
and of the physical part as well; but Jesus and his disciples taught that
there is a change in all material things and that transition of the soul
and body are manifestations of the spiritual law. However, disease and
suffering are abnormal and preventable, and this Jesus demonstrated.
Also, he taught how to live that the physical body might be free of
suffering and the mind free of the tortures of sin. The Rosicrucians of
today teach how we may live in harmony with natural law and avoid the
suffering of the flesh and the sins of the body, so that we may dwell in
peace and happiness until the hour of transition comes.
It is easily understood that the teachings and demonstrations of
Jesus antagonized those of the orthodox faith. Jesus was a modernist in
every sense of the word, and he came into the land of fundamentalists
with doctrines and demonstrations of doctrines that were contrary to
all that had been taught to and believed by the multitudes.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 133 —
In my recent journey through Palestine I noted the contest between
the various sects, and especially the determination of the strictly
orthodox to adhere to the ancient customs and rites of their ancestors.
It was quite evident that if Jesus came to Jerusalem today and preached
once again as he did before, and made demonstrations of the truth of
his teachings, he would be crucified again by incarceration, by rejection
on the part of the strictly orthodox, and by ridicule on the part of the
skeptics and doubters. Undoubtedly the same would result if he came
to the Western world and right into the midst of those who are at
present discussing the evolution of our thinking, and the advancement
of our comprehension, which effects a change in our beliefs and faiths.
During the period of the public ministry of Jesus, he passed through
four ancient, traditional stages of initiation as outlined centuries before
by Pythagoras, which were: The first degree, or preparation, culminating
in the Sermon on the Mount; the second degree, or purification,
represented by the miracubus healings and the demonstrations of
Christian mystical therapeutics; the third degree, or illumination,
manifested by the raising of Lazarus; and the fourth degree, or spiritual
vision, manifested by the transfiguration.
How these events and stages of his mission culminated, and what
they meant to this great Master, I will present in the next and following
chapters.
— 134 —
Chapter 15
THE TRUTH ABOUT THE CRUCIFIXION
WITHIN RECENT YEARS, one or two pamphlets have appeared, presenting what claims to be a story of the Crucifixion as recorded by an eyewitness. The story told therein is very short and merely throws some light of a questionable nature on a few points of the story of the Crucifixion. The statements in that pamphlet which were worthy of consideration were taken from several reliable sources and fictitiously enlarged by an unknown author who was merely making his appeal to those who desire a surprising story.
The true story of the Crucifixion is recorded in a number of ancient writings, all of which are very dependable and consistent in their outline of the incidents. Even Judas left a brief outline of his connection with the affair and what he noted of it. His story merely substantiates some of the points contained in the other records. The principal and most complete outlines of the story are contained in the three manuscripts written by different scribes and preserved in the monasteries of Tibet, Egypt, and India.
It is generally believed by biblical students that the only record or story of the Crucifixion is that contained in the Christian Gospels. Critics of the Christian doctrines and biblical stories have often argued that they did not believe the story at all because they could find no verification or substantiation of it in other records or in the writings of contemporary historians. These persons seem to forget that at the time
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 135 —
of the Crucifixion the event was one of paramount importance to the
followers of Jesus and to the several sects, the members of which were
associated with the work being done by Jesus and his apostles. The
event was of little importance from a national point of view and from
the point of view of the orthodox Jews and the powers of Rome.
For this reason, contemporary historians, writing of the broader
and larger events of the day, did not look upon the crucifixion of
a religious leader as an event of such national importance or such
worldly consideration as to warrant a place in their writings. From our
present-day point of view, the Crucifixion appears as one of the most
important events in the history of civilization; but that is because time
has given us the proper perspective, and the results of the Crucifixion
have enlarged themselves into a worldwide effect that is still vital to
the lives of men and women. Many events in recent years have passed
by hardly noticed in the historical records and have since become of
extreme importance. The assassination of one man in one country
in Europe, in 1914, might have passed by with little comment in the
newspapers, and certainly without any comment at all in the history of
the nation, if the future developments associated with that event, or
gradually resulting from it, had not quickly given it a place of worldwide
importance, connected with one of the greatest wars in human history.
In the case of the Crucifixion of Jesus, the real importance of the
event and the greater effect of it evolved very slowly, and only after
many centuries had passed. Those who wrote about it while it was
still fresh in their minds dealt with it, not as an event of worldwide
importance, nor as an event that needed to be set forth in minute
detail, but as an event that had its categorical place in the scheme
of things associated with the purely religious activities of their sect.
For this reason they recorded only those points which had a religious
or spiritual significance, according to the individual writers personal
opinion. Hence the difference in presentation of the story and the
difference in emphasis of the various points involved. This explains
the lack of details in the Gospels.
However, in the record of the writers who intended to preserve
the complete story in the archives of the G.W.B. and its associated
organizations, the matter was viewed as one that had an important
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 136 —
connection with the series of events that had occurred in the history
of the organization in ages past. The writers presented evidence in
the relationship of this event with similar events substantiating the
doctrinal teachings and traditions of the cosmic and spiritual laws as
made manifest in the lives of every great avatar and every great leader
of human evolution. In the opinion of these writers, many incidents
connected with the Crucifixion were of extreme importance and
were carefully recorded, while the same incidents were passed over as
inconsequential by the writers of the records published in the Christian
Bible.
Another reason for a considerable difference between the story
as told by the Gospel writers and the story as told by the scribes of
the G.W.B. lies in the fact that the writers of the Christian Gospels
were writing for the purpose of establishing and maintaining certain
doctrines and principles which were becoming the foundation of a
new religious sect. Therefore, they had to adhere to the traditional
story of the Crucifixion, as it had been officially outlined by the
apostles and presented as the theological basis for the Christian
foundation. Every incident of the Crucifixion inconsistent with these
theological principles and foundation traditions had to be eliminated
from their stories, not for the purpose of deception, but in order that
those unprepared and not ready for the complete story would not be
confused, or their attention distracted from the principal elements, by
the presentation of mystical elements reserved only for the inner circle
and the more advanced followers.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 137 —
The emblem shown above is one of the oldest of the popular mystical
signs and has been mistakenly attributed to the American Indians
because it was found freely used in some of their mystical decorations.
Recent research found it engraved among the very old symbols of the
Mayans in Yucatan, where it was probably in use hundreds of years
before the Christian era. It has also been found as one of the signs in the
ancient Buddhist zodiacs and is a symbol in the Asoka inscriptions. It
was the sectarian mark of the Jains and the distinctive badge of the sect
of Xaca Japonicus. The earliest form of the cross found in the Christian
catacombs is in this form. This symbol is one of the most sacred in
use in the monasteries of Tibet by the G.W.B. In Christian symbolism
this cross is supposed to represent two capital Gammas, crossed and
reversed, and is used as the sign of “faith in the crucified.”
From this the reader will understand that the complete story and
the real facts of the Crucifixion were accessible to and known by
the founders who established the early Christian church in the 4th to
7th centuries A.D. In fact, these founders had easier access to these
records, and to many others now lost or hidden, than we of the present
time, despite any connections we may have with the greatest and most
complete existing library of secret manuscripts.
We know that the church authorities had access to these secret
records, because in the council meetings of the early Christian church,
and in the discussions that took place between the highest authorities
of the early church, reference was made to certain portions of
manuscripts and official records dealing with the Crucifixion and other
incidents of the life of Jesus which are now concealed or have been
destroyed. That many such records were destroyed is proved by the
fact that at certain times in the past these various councils of the early
church authorized the destruction of certain manuscripts which were
discussed by them, because they decided that the existence of such
records might embarrass them in the future. The official records of
many of these councils contain long and lively discussions regarding
these manuscripts and their contents; and we find that a number of
eminent authorities in the early church seceded from the councils and
brought the wrath of the early church upon their heads by their refusal
to agree to the destruction of these important manuscripts and the
plan to conceal certain known facts.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 138 —
In previous chapters of this book I have referred to the statements
of some of the church authorities that demonstrated how familiar
they were with the secret or hidden details of the life of Jesus.
Unquestionably many of these important records and manuscripts are
today preserved in the Vatican at Rome, for it was the ambition of the
church leaders during the 7th to 12th centuries to procure and take
away from public or even private study, all books and manuscripts in
the rare collections in Oriental lands which might contain statements
differing from those established by them as the official traditions and
doctrines of their church. We know, for instance, of one incident which
took place during the Crusades to the Holy Land, at which time one
magnificent library containing 20,000 rare manuscripts of historical
importance, dealing mostly with religious matters, and especially with
the affairs preceding and during the lifetime of Jesus, was destroyed
completely—reduced to ashes after a selected few of the manuscripts
were forwarded to Rome.
Fortunately for us, some very important manuscripts have survived
all of the destructive processes, and it is from these that many
incidents regarding the life of Jesus have been extracted for this
book. The incidents of the Crucifixion, taken from these records, are
especially illuminating, and because they are too long to be placed in
any one volume, I find it necessary to select at this time merely the
highlights from these records and piece them together in the following
paragraphs.
First of all, we find that the Crucifixion of Jesus did not come
about at the hands of the Jews as a protest against his teachings or
as a punishment for his attempted leadership. The idea that the Jews
persecuted and eventually crucified Jesus is a viewpoint adopted by
the founders of the early Christian church, because it was consistent
with the theological principles they wished to establish and with the
traditions they wished to make the basis of their doctrines.
It is generally contended by Christian authorities that Jesus was an
outcast among the Jews except for the few hundreds or thousands who
constituted his followers; but there is no foundation for this idea in any
of the incidents of his life, nor in the facts as we find them. While it is
true that the Jews did not consider Jesus a Jew, but a Gentile, and many
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 139 —
of them ridiculed the idea that anyone from Galilee or anyone who was
believed to be a Nazarite could do anything that was good, nevertheless
they would not have crucified him because he was a foreigner, nor even
if they had considered him an “upstart” in their midst. The idea that he
was destroying their religion or wrecking their church is not supported
by any of the real facts. Jesus himself said, on more than one occasion,
that he came not to destroy the law or the words of the prophets, nor
to belittle the prophets and pull them down from the high place they
held among the Jews, but to fulfill the predictions of the prophets and
to support the laws they had established.
It has also been said that Jesus attempted to turn the faith of the Jews
from their one God toward another, or a trinity of Gods, and for this
reason brought condemnation upon his work. We find no foundation
for this belief either; and when Jesus was asked as to what was the first
commandment, he answered: “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is
one, and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy
soul and all thy mind.” Certainly that was consistent with the Jewish
religious viewpoint and could not have been antagonistic. While it is
true that he did criticize a few of the practices in the synagogue and
did attempt to direct the thoughts of the people to higher ideals, this
in itself would not have warranted the Jews to crucify Jesus, nor to do
more than simply ignore him.
Jesus was no more radical than Isaiah had been and no more liberal
in his orthodoxy than Micah. He did not attempt to establish a new
sect or a new church of any kind, despite the statements of many
Christians who think that Jesus himself established the first Christian
church and started the first Christian movement toward the foundation
of a separate and individual sect. Even if he had done so, this would
have been no new thing in that land, for among the Jews there were
various sects, some very old and some very new, such as the Pharisees,
Sadducees, Essenes, Nazarites, Nazarenes, Kuthites, Boethusians, and
many others. And yet not one of the founders of these various sects
was ever punished by death.
Jesus may have proclaimed himself as a Messiah, much to the disgust
of the strictly orthodox, but according to Jewish custom any member
of the House of Judah might have believed it without being killed by
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 140 —
the Jews for such a belief. He may have referred to himself, although we
have no record of it, as the “unique and only begotten Son of God,”
but we doubt that the simple claim of being the “Son of God” would
have antagonized them in any way; for all Jews believed that God was
their “Father” and always prayed to God as their Heavenly Father, and
referred to themselves as the Children of God. Such a conception of the
Deity was common in Israel.
The one outstanding point in connection with the Crucifixion of
Jesus is the use of the cross. That one thing tells the story that Rome
had ordered his death, and that it was a Roman punishment and not a
Jewish one, for the Jews would have stoned him, in their usual manner,
had they desired to get rid of this man for any reason. The fact that
his death was ordered in the Roman manner, and at the hands of
those officially delegated to carry out the death sentence in a legal
manner, indicates that the whole affair was not one of mob violence or
religious persecution on the part of the Jews, but a sentence officially
proclaimed at Rome.
We must remember that more important than the claim of the
apostles or the disciples of Jesus that he was a Messiah and the Son
of God, was the title being bestowed upon him by the enthusiastic
followers who idolized him and, without discrimination or discretion,
proclaimed him King of the Jews. This was a serious thing and the real
reason for his Crucifixion.
The Jews were anxious to have a leader, whether he was the true
Messiah or one anticipating or representing a Messiah to come. And
if this self-appointed or truly ordained leader brought them a message
of peace and happiness and performed miracles of healing, he would
have been tolerated by the majority of the Jews if not by all of them.
The restlessness among the Jews in Palestine and their hopes and plans
to be freed from the yoke of Rome had caused Rome considerable
anxiety in the past. Everywhere the spies of the Roman government
were watching for the possible uprising of a rebellion and the selection
of a leader that might start another war; and when the whisperings
or even the open professions of the enthusiastic followers of Jesus
proclaimed him the King of the Jews, it was a matter serious enough to
be immediately reported to Rome and be given official attention.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 141 —
Jesus was undoubtedly feared by Rome, according to many ancient
records that deal with just this phase of the matter. His simple teachings
were opposed to those taught as the official doctrines of the Romans.
His preachments tended toward holy socialism, and the tyrannical
imperialism of Rome could never harmonize with such teachings as
this. The only offense that can be attributed to Jesus throughout his
whole career was a political offense from the Roman point of view.
The Roman standing army in Israel and the spies maintained by
the Romans made it possible for that government to take stringent
measures whenever there seemed to be a traitor in their midst or a
possible uprising.
Caiaphas would appear to have been a spy for the Roman government
if we are to judge by the secret reports that he made to Rome regarding
the activities of Jesus. On the other hand, he may have been merely
a personal enemy, for he certainly did do everything possible to keep
Rome informed about Jesus and to make it difficult for Jesus to
continue his work. Even though Caiaphas was an eminent leader of
the Sanhedrin, he did not represent this body in the reports he made,
nor in the attitude he assumed. It is even indicated that Caiaphas went
so far as to present large sums of money for the purpose of procuring
evidence and making sure that a warrant would be issued by Rome for
the arrest and trial of Jesus. So we find in this man a greater enemy to
Jesus and his work than Judas.
It appears from some of the ancient records that most of the
contentions and revolts that became quite popular in Palestine at about
this time were purposely attributed to Jesus, or more precisely to his
followers. Gradually Rome became convinced that it could end the
enormous expense to which it had been placed in constantly investigating
and watching the Christ movement in Jerusalem, thus cutting short the
trouble it had experienced in dealing with these matters by removing
the leader of the so-called new political faction. Therefore, by the time
Jesus entered Jerusalem for the purpose of carrying on the culminating
phases of his work after a long and successful tour in the outlying
sections, a warrant for his arrest was already in the hands of officials in
Jerusalem. Owing to the fact that he arrived at the approaching festival
period, it was deemed advisable not to interfere with the quietude and
sacred peacefulness of the Jewish feast days. Caiaphas anticipated an
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 142 —
uprising when the hour for the arrest came. Such an event would have
been disastrous to the traditions of the church, would have upset the
celebration of the feast pilgrims, and incidentally would have detracted
from the very large financial harvest which always resulted when there
were so many thousands of pilgrims in Jerusalem.
There are a number of references in the ancient records showing
that an assassination of Jesus had not only been thought of, but had
been planned by some of the hirelings of both the religious fanatics
of Jerusalem and the local Roman authorities. It was decided, however,
that such an act would be attributed to the Jews rather than the Romans,
because the Romans had every reason and every power to proceed
openly and have Jesus condemned as a political troublemaker.
The story of Judas as presented in the Christian version is a garbled
one, modified in order to illustrate the fact that among the followers
of Jesus, as with every great leader or avatar in the past, there was one
who represented the evil forces and principles of the world, and who
typified the untrustworthy element met with in all phases of life. The
facts of the story are that the officials appointed to arrest Jesus realized
that if they attempted to arrest him in public while he was preaching
or performing his miracles, they would have to contend with a mob
situation resulting in the use of arms and force, the destruction of life
and property, and the creation of a condition not desired by either the
Roman or Jewish people. Therefore, it was decided to arrest Jesus in
private, when he was outside of the city and accompanied by but a few
of his followers. Someone was needed, however, who could identify
him at a distance in the white raiment which so many of the Essenes
wore. Judas was willing to serve in this case for the bribe that was
offered him, and in truth he did typify the element in life which the
story in the Christian Bible presents.
That Jesus knew of the coming events, and that treachery and
false reports were about to end his career, is evidenced not only in
the Christian stories but in many of the private records. The soldiers
representing the Roman government followed the directions of Judas
and found Jesus in his usual environment in the Garden of Gethsemane
where he was wont to hold secret consultations with Nicodemus,
Mathaeli, Philopoldi, and Yousef of Arimathea. While the soldiers
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 143 —
were arresting Jesus, Yousef of Arimathea made off hastily to inform
others of what had occurred and to make immediate plans to aid Jesus.
Pilate was consulted and he agreed to delay matters till after the feast
days. He feared there had been some illegal trickery or action in what
had occurred and that criticism would result, thus jeopardizing his own
position. Reading between the lines of the various ancient stories, we
cannot feel that Pilate was moved by any inner or outer sentiment in
his dealings with Jesus that was impersonal or unselfish.
The warrant called for immediate trial, and Pilate found reason
legally to delay matters without antagonizing the Roman authorities
and yet serve his own purpose. There were those who called upon
Pilate and represented themselves as Jews, while others represented
themselves as supporters of the Roman government, who demanded
that the order of the emperors prefect be carried out at once. The
warrant was of a nature that called for the death sentence if the person
arrested was found guilty as charged. It is recorded that the decisions
of the minor judges and witnesses were reported to Pilate that very
night, but there was not found in these decisions that testimony which
Pilate believed was sufficient for him to permit immediate execution.
In some of the Christian stories there is an intimation that some
persons in Pilate’s household were followers of Jesus. We find no
reason for this statement except that Pilate himself had had some
absent healing conducted by Jesus, which had resulted in the cure of a
diseased hand. But if all those who had been healed or helped by Jesus
had been true followers of him, there would have been such a multitude
of followers in Jerusalem that no one would have even dared to plan
the Crucifixion, let alone carry it out. It is not uncommon for avatars
to have the very arm that was once paralyzed and cured become the
arm and the hand that smites them first. Pilate was pleading for delay,
but pressure was being brought to bear and so he yielded.
The attempt to transfer the case to Galilee, because Jesus was not
a Jew, and therefore bring it under the direction of Herod, who was
attending the feast in Jerusalem, also failed. Herod himself was not
in such a position of stability and so free of criticism that he dared
to take part in an affair that he knew was a more serious matter than
appeared on the surface. The intriguers, in the meantime, feared that
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 144 —
Jesus might slip out of their clutches, but no attempt was made by his
followers to do otherwise than demand fair trial and sufficient delay to
enable them to prepare their defense.
Jesus himself seemed to be unconcerned regarding the controversy
among the higher magistrates, for it is recorded that during these very
bitter hours he continued to give treatments, teach, and carry on with
a peaceful mind. We must think of the majesty of such a mind that
was able to do this, knowing, as Jesus knew, what was really in store
for him. The followers of Jesus who were attempting to prepare some
defense for him, or to secure his freedom, recalled the fact that it was
customary on the occasion of such feasts to give life and liberty to
some criminal, and this point was presented before the officials with
the request that the multitude preferred Jesus as the one who should
be the receiver of such a feast gift. Even this plan failed. Finally, Pilate
turned Jesus over to the mob of accusers and personal enemies, and
the process of scourging began as a preliminary to the Crucifixion.
The manner in which the leaders of the mob exerted themselves at this
time, as recorded in all the records, shows that the greatest enmity and
ill feeling was felt on the part of a few of the Jews who were personal
enemies.
However, the apostles and the Essenes were carrying on their
plans silently and appealing to higher authorities to save the life of
their Master. Those who knew what was being done in the form of
appealing to the emperor for a reconsideration, and appealing to other
authorities for intervention, could not understand why these things did
not come to an issue more quickly. According to the records, a great
many of the followers of Jesus thought that more trickery was being
perpetrated, while those who knew realized that Jesus had advised them
of the real nature of the Crucifixion, and how it would terminate, and
what it meant to the great work of the secret organization. Therefore,
there were two groups who watched the developments: one moved
by anxiety lest each hour would produce no effect that would stay the
proceedings, and the other group that knew intuitively, and perhaps
from secret information given them, that all would not end as the
others believed.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 145 —
Nearly a week had elapsed since the warrant had been issued. Hour
by hour passed until finally the body of Jesus was raised on the cross
on Golgotha, a little hill just outside the city walls, that was so round and
suggestive of the shape of a skull that it was called Golgotha. Here
other condemned men had been crucified, as had been the custom
of the Romans for many years. The cross had always been a device
for Roman crucifixion and persecution, and to the Essenes it was
an emblem of human suffering, tests, and trials; but the raising of
this particular cross with its precious burden became at once a new
symbol to the Brothers and Sisters in White Clothing and the secret
organization. From that hour the cross had a new meaning in spiritual
and mystical thought. The Jewish factions which had gathered round to
witness the raising of the cross dispersed to prepare for the approach
of the sabbath, and only the Gentiles and the members of the secret
organizations remained there to watch and to protect the body of their
Master.
Considerable comment has been made in recent years, and perhaps
in many of the years gone by, concerning the words spoken by Jesus
while on the cross. Those who have tried to argue that Jesus was not
the great Master and Son of God as claimed by the apostles and the
disciples refer to the words in the Book of Mark 15:34, which are given
there, in one of the languages which Jesus spoke as “Eloi, Eloi, lema
sabachthani?” which is translated in the Bible as meaning, “My God,
my God, why have you forsaken me?” The Book of Matthew gives
practically the same wording. However, the four books of Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John agree in saying that immediately after speaking
these words, Jesus yielded up the ghost, or gave up the ghost.
These words spoken by Jesus and the statement that he gave up the
ghost are highly significant in a mystical sense. It was the Holy Ghost
which Jesus yielded up at that moment, and this was the same Holy
Ghost that came into the womb of Mary and manifested the creative
power of the Logos. It was the same Holy Ghost that descended
upon Jesus at the time of his baptism and which infused him with
the authority and power to be the living representative of the Logos
on earth. At the time of yielding up the Holy Ghost, while on the
cross, Jesus permitted the special power and authority to return to the
Cosmic Consciousness and leave him as one who had completed his
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 146 —
mission and was no longer the living power of the Logos on earth.
This is why Luke expresses the incident by having Jesus say, “Father,
into your hands I commend my spirit,” and John wrote that Jesus said,
“It is finished.”
Every mystic will understand that these references to giving up the
Holy Ghost cannot possibly refer to the giving up of life, vitality, or vital
consciousness. Those who have attempted, since the 5th century A.D., to
advance the idea that Jesus actually died while still on the cross, or that
his transition occurred at that time, attempt to use the term giving up the
Holy Ghost as meaning giving up life and consciousness. If the Holy Ghost
is to be considered in this particular instance as meaning vitality, life,
and animation, then we must be consistent and interpret the term in
the same way in every instance where it has been used in connection
with the life of Jesus. Can we say then, that when Jesus was baptized
and the Holy Ghost descended upon him, that it was life, vitality and
consciousness, and that this was the beginning of his existence as a
living being?
It is quite evident by the whole story of the baptism in the Christian
Gospels that the descent of the Holy Ghost was the holy authority and
divine power coming into the body of Jesus, or into his consciousness,
completing his preparation and perfection of development as a divine
Son of God, an avatar, and the living Christ. It was the reversal of
this process—the Holy Ghost and the Christhood withdrawing into
the spirit and consciousness of God— which occurred on the cross
as the culmination of his brief mission and the end of his official
Christhood.
We realize, now, that the words Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani? could not
mean, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” and that there
is either some hidden meaning in this expression or the words have
been misinterpreted. Going to our ancient records and the original
version and transcriptions that are recorded in reliable archives, we find
that the words written there are Heloi, Heloi, lema sabachthani? We find,
then, that what Jesus said was, “My Temple of Helois, my Brethren
of Helois, why have you forsaken me?” and that he was referring to
the brothers and sisters of the Temple at Helios where he had been
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 147 —
initiated. They were expected to prevent any unnecessary suffering and
be ready to render any aid that was necessary. Just at this time, in the
midst of his intense suffering, Jesus was not aware of all that was being
done for him and probably looked upon the absence of so many of
the brothers and sisters as a lack of attention at a crucial moment. It
was at this moment that Jesus entered into the stage of transition from
Divine Master to human Master, and the transition had its culmination in
the Ascension as described in the next chapter. We see, therefore, that
the problem regarding his last words on the cross resolves itself into a
further indication of his real majesty and divine attunement.
Just as the sun was casting its last rays over the horizon and the sky
seemed to be darkening more rapidly and threatening a storm, which
appeared highly significant to the faithful, a commotion was occurring
in the palace of Pilate. A herald had arrived with a document bearing
the private seal of Tiberius, and all were anxious to know its contents.
This document instructed Pilate to cancel the warrant and to stay all
proceedings until a complete investigation could be made by Cyrenius.
In the meantime, Jesus was to be set at liberty until a full report could
be made.
Pilate immediately sent a messenger to those who were in charge
of the Crucifixion stating what had occurred, and he instructed that
no further persecution or torture of the body was to be permitted. In
fact, his instructions stated that if there was any life still in the body of
Jesus, it was to be taken down from the cross and sent to a hospice to
be cared for. This was the news anticipated by Nicodemus, Mathaeli,
and Yousef of Arimathea, and of course it was unpleasant news to the
intriguers, and especially the Covenanters.
The storm soon broke and delayed the removal of the body of
Jesus for a few hours, but in that time food and drink were given him,
and support was placed under his body to prevent it from pulling too
greatly upon the nails which tortured his flesh. The few faithful ones
noted with great anxiety that a somber stillness and a numbness was
passing over the body, and that gradually Jesus lost consciousness. At
the earliest possible moment, when the storm quieted, torches were
brought and an examination of the body revealed that Jesus was not
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 148 —
dead. The blood flowing from the wounds proved that the body was
not lifeless, and so the cross was immediately taken down and the body
removed from it.
The body was then taken to a burial vault owned by Yousef of
Arimathea, which had supposedly been built for the care of his family;
being a wealthy man he made it an elaborate and well-constructed burial
place. The body was placed in a special part of the tomb which had
been prearranged for its reception, and physicians connected with the
Essenian community were at hand to render every possible assistance
in caring for the wounds.
The Essenes had secured permission for the use of this tomb as a
burial place for Jesus, and the authorities had granted this permission
in the belief that it was to be the permanent tomb of Jesus. Therefore,
shortly after the body was placed in the tomb, some outer guards
belonging to the organization announced the coming of the officials
who were to inspect the tomb and approve of the burial. Jesus had just
attained complete consciousness, and his wounds had been dressed
sufficiently for the Essenes to wrap his body in clean white clothes, in
preparation for a short sleep, when the officials reached the tomb. The
officials were permitted to watch the closing of the tomb and affix their
seals upon the stones and the door which closed it securely. Apparently
everything of an official nature to make the tomb a permanent burial
place had been done according to law, and yet according to our records,
much was left undone because the Essenes had made sure that the
officials did not go too far in the process of sealing and closing every
means of entrance and exit.
The description of the tomb in the records from which I quote is
not complete enough for us to understand thoroughly its form and
structure, and we are not sure whether there were two doorways or
only one. It appears, however, from all records, that a great stone was
used to close up the doorway after the doors had been shut, for the
purpose of hiding the doorway so that the burial place, which was
in the side of a rock, would not be too apparent or attract too much
attention. It was also recorded that Nicodemus was fearful that some
trick might be played, as he realized there were those who knew of
the trickery on the part of Caiaphas, and that the resentment of the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 149 —
followers of Jesus might take the form of some plan to thwart the law.
So he demanded that the sepulchre be watched for the satisfaction of
Caiaphas and the law.
Late in the night the storm which had only partially ceased raged
fiercely again throughout the whole valley of Judea, and thunder and
lightning echoed and flashed in the mountains roundabout. According
to the records, it was such an unusually severe storm that it cleared
the streets of Jerusalem and the roads just outside of the walls of all
pilgrims, and it even forced some of the guards and soldiers to take
cover.
— 150 —
Chapter 16
THE SECRET FACTS OF THE RESURRECTION
SHORTLY BEFORE SUNRISE, Yousef of Arimathea and other Essenes who had been hiding nearby approached the tomb when the guards were trying to protect themselves from the rain by seeking shelter in some cattle houses at some distance. Using the means they had previously provided, and taking advantage of the laxity of the officials in sealing the doorway properly, they caused this great stone to be thrown over and the doorway to be opened. When they entered the tomb, they found Jesus resting easily and rapidly regaining strength and vitality. After an hour the storm ceased sufficiently for the Essenes to escort him from the tomb.
Jesus had used every one of the powers coming into his being, through the perfect attunement he had with the Cosmic, to restore strength and consciousness to every part of his body and to all of his highly developed faculties. Therefore, it was possible for the Essenes to place his body upon a colt and cover him with some heavy garments while they led the colt with its precious burden through the mild rain and deep darkness to a secluded place belonging to the organization, not far from the walls of the city.
In the Book of John in the Holy Bible, is revealed one of the interesting facts concerning the Crucifixion which appears in the ancient records from which I am quoting, and which incident is often overlooked by the most critical of the Bible students. It is that although it was a common practice to break the bones in the body of every
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 151 —
crucified person and to cause their bodies to hang upon the cross for
several days so there would be no possibility of the body remaining
alive, nevertheless the body of Jesus was taken down without the
bones being broken, even though the soldiers broke the bones of the
two criminals that were upon the crosses close by.
This was not an oversight on the part of the soldiers by any means,
for not only did they fulfill the law by breaking the bones of the two
criminals, but they had been so accustomed to this procedure for many
years that we cannot believe that after having performed their duty
with the other two, they would forget the practice, momentarily, in
the case of the third body upon the cross. The ancient records to
which I have been referring state that when the soldiers were notified
that the body must be taken down immediately because a release had
come, and that everything must be done to permit Jesus to regain his
consciousness and strength if he had not passed through transition,
they realized that they were not to injure, torture, or in any way affect
the ease and comfort of Jesus, but to relieve him as quickly as possible
from the agony in which they found him.
It may be interesting to call attention to the fact that nowhere in the
Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John is the positive statement
made as an observation of one of these disciples that Jesus died on the
cross or that he was dead when they removed him from the cross and
placed him in the tomb. In John 19:33 there is the statement that the
soldiers believed Jesus to be dead, but John does not make a positive
statement of his own, and when he continues by mentioning the spear
thrust, we have no reason to believe it was more than a surface wound,
while, on the other hand, the fact that blood and water flowed forth
would indicate that Jesus was still alive. I know that in the Apostles’s
Creed used in the average Christian church, the statements therein
refer to the fact that Jesus suffered and died on the cross, and it is
commonly believed that the statements in this Apostles’s Creed were
taken from the statements made by the different apostles.
The truth of the matter is that the present-day Apostles’s Creed went
through a number of changes in the centuries after the Crucifixion at
the various high councils of the church, and the first drafts of the
creed, which I have before me, are considerably different from those
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 152 —
later adopted. In the third of the five drafts of this creed, we find the
statement that Jesus was “fastened to a cross, he rose the third day.”
In the first and original draft, the statement is that Jesus was crucified
under Pontius Pilate and “on the third day brought to life from the
dead.” In the last draft, the wording was changed to read, “suffered
under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.”
The statement in the early draft of the creed that Jesus rose from the
dead should be associated with the wording in Luke 24:5, wherein
the question is asked of those who were seeking for Jesus, “Why do
you look for the living among the dead?” We must bear in mind that
Jesus was placed in a tomb that was intended for the dead, and in
an environment intended exclusively for the dead and surrounded by
the so-called dead. In other words, the question might be reworded
as follows: “If you are looking for Jesus, the everliving Son of God,
why do you come to a cemetery and peer into tombs and sepulchres
looking for him? Why do you expect to find a living person where
only the dead may be found?” The early drafts of the Apostles’s Creed
clearly show that the idea meant to be conveyed was that after the
Crucifixion, Jesus was temporarily placed in a tomb among the dead,
and that he quickly rose from that place and out of that environment,
and returned again to his place among the living.
There is absolutely no intimation in the early drafts of that creed,
nor in any of the discussions which occurred in the high councils of
the church when the creed passed through its many changes in the
different centuries, that Jesus was believed to have died on the cross or
in the tomb immediately after the Crucifixion. The creed was composed
so long after the days of the apostles and the writing of the books of
the Bible that it had to be invented and created like the many newer
doctrines of Christianity. In the Roman Catholic Encyclopedia we find
admission that many of the highest authorities state that the creed can
be traced to no earlier period than the second half of the 5th century
A.D., and there is the further admission that the idea that the apostles
composed the creed on the day of the Pentecost is merely a legend
dating back to the 6th century. We read also this interesting statement
in the Roman Catholic Encyclopedia: “Modern apologists in defending the
claim to Apostolicity (of the Apostles’s Creed) extend it only to the old
Roman form, and are somewhat hampered by the objection that if the
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 153 —
Roman form had been really held to be the inspired utterance of the
Apostles, it would not have been modified at pleasure by various local
churches, and in particular would never have been entirely supplanted
by our existing form.”
According to the Rosicrucian and other ancient records, various
persons came to the tomb to see the body of Jesus after the sabbath
was over. They brought spices, clean linens, and other things as was
their custom in the case of any who had passed away, but they found
the tomb open and Jesus gone. The storm and lightning, and perhaps
a mild form of earthquake, had left much ruin and havoc in the
cemetery. A number of tombstones were thrown over and a number
of sepulchres were opened by stones rolling away or sliding down
from their proper position.
The soldiers who were supposed to be on guard to watch and protect
the body of Jesus, but who had slipped away into some sheltered place,
were on hand bright and early to meet those who came to the tomb
of Jesus, and they had a very ready explanation of what had occurred.
They did not admit their own neglect, which would have caused them
to be severely punished and imprisoned, but stated that during the
height of the storm all of the tombs were opened by some miraculous
power and that a great blinding light came down and surrounded the
tomb of Jesus, and in this light they saw mysterious figures which
escorted Jesus, who had returned to life. This story did not appear to
the soldiers to be much different from hundreds of other stories being
told about Jesus and his miracles, and about the manifestations of
God’s wrath and God’s love in connection with many unusual things
during the preceding nine years.
The public, and especially the followers of Jesus, were ready to accept
the story that the soldiers told. Since Pilate realized that the body of
Jesus had been saved and that the stories were only an explanation
to satisfy the curious, and since Rome had authorized the release of
Jesus, and therefore cared little regarding his present whereabouts, no
investigation was conducted. Thus, the story of the soldiers and the
followers became the accepted explanation.
The other incidents regarding the Resurrection, as told in the
Christian Bible and in other sacred writings, may or may not be true
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 154 —
in their minute details, for they are based upon testimony of various
persons and are somewhat conflicting. Only one fact of interest is
noted in the Rosicrucian records regarding the tomb of Jesus, and this
is to the effect that during the first years after the Resurrection, the
tomb of Yousef of Arimathea was used as a shrine by thousands who
were followers of Jesus. The tomb was in a badly damaged condition,
partly split open by a huge crack in the rock which sheltered it and a
crack in some of the stone masonry that supported one side of it; the
tomb had every appearance of having been struck by lightning during
the terrible storm. If the storm did such damage as this to the Holy
Sepulchre, and to the other tombs and burial places in the vicinity, we
can easily understand why the soldiers conceived the story that they
told and why it was so readily accepted.
As quickly as possible the Essenes escorted and conveyed Jesus to
a home of one of their associates in Galilee. It was their intention
to have Jesus rest and recuperate before escorting him to a place of
secrecy and isolation for a time. Jesus recovered very rapidly so that he
was able to walk part of the way on his journey. He was met by a few
who knew him and who were surprised to find him still living. We have
many traditional stories regarding his contact with his disciples and
others during the time of his recuperation.
The appearance of Jesus in the midst of his disciples on various
occasions during his period of recuperation constitutes in several cases,
a mystical demonstration of the ability of the Master to project his
personality and consciousness to places distant from his physical body.
Such demonstrations of the higher spiritual laws as this were common
not only to Jesus, but many of the eminent avatars of the past. In fact,
some of his apostles and disciples and many of the sisters and brothers
of the G.W.B. very often made themselves visible to others at distant
points. We find in the present-day teachings of the Rosicrucians, in
various lands, the simple laws which help men and women to attain
that high degree of psychic development which enables them at will
to project the psychic or soul consciousness to a distant point and
become visible and even sensible to the higher faculties of persons
who are likewise developed to the proper degree of receptivity.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 155 —
The time was coming, however, for Jesus to close his public
missionary work quite definitely and enter that stage of silent activity
into which all great avatars of the past have entered, and which is
always the goal of every messenger of the G.W.B. Jesus was devoting
most of his time to teaching his disciples the doctrines and principles
which they should present in their work with the public, thus preparing
them for the missionary work they would have to continue after his
retirement.
The great change that had come about in the personal appearance
of Jesus after the Ascension of the Holy Ghost from his consciousness
while he was on the cross caused a great many, who had been familiar
with his physical appearance and spiritual aura, to fail to recognize
him when they saw him clothed in different raiment and appearing
as a simple Essene during his days at Galilee. The disciples knew
that a still greater event in his life was imminent, and of course the
eminent officers of the organization were already preparing for the
final manifestation of his divine place among humans.
For forty days Jesus continued his close association with his disciples
and apostles, and we find that this forty-day period is again significant
and coincides with the other forty day periods mentioned in another
part of this book. During these forty days Jesus attended several of
the suppers or symbolical feasts which were typical of the Essenes and
which later became one of the forms of ceremony in the Christian
church. One of these, the so-called Last Supper, became important
in Christian doctrines of Jesus’s life; but there were many other such
feasts thereafter in privacy not revealed in the Christian records,
probably because they were not significant or attended by as large a
number of his disciples as the one referred to.
So, on the fortieth day the apostles assembled, in accordance with
instructions, on a mountaintop outside of the city of Jerusalem, where
they would be separated from the multitude and out of sight of any
passers-by. It was just at sunset that Jesus came into their midst and
arranged them before him in a group forming a semicircle, facing
the setting sun. He stood before them so that as they faced him they
saw his magnificent figure outlined as a silhouette against the red and
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 156 —
gold of the sky. He proceeded to explain to them the purpose of this
unusual secret session and the real work that was to be accomplished
by them in the future.
According to the records, he first announced that not one of
them was to leave the circle or depart from the mountaintop until
he had received from his Father in Heaven the Holy Ghost and the
divine authority to carry on his work as an official apostle. In other
words, he announced that apostolic power was about to come to
them from a divine source and that they must not break the spell of
cosmic attunement which he was about to establish until each one
had experienced the influx of the Holy Ghost. In the light of what
actually occurred, we can easily realize how important it was for Jesus
to command them to remain where they were and not depart too
quickly; for he knew that there would come a moment when each
would believe that the strange session had ended and that there was no
further need for remaining on the mountaintop.
Naturally, the apostles asked questions, and it appears that they
sought to determine what form of activity they should adopt and just
how their work would affect the establishment of the Kingdom of
Heaven which Jesus had announced as imminent. But Jesus replied
by rebuking them for their inquisitiveness at that moment and then
assured them that in due season all would be explained to them. He
further stated that after the Holy Ghost had come upon them, and
they went out in the world to carry on their individual missions, they
would be representing the great work in all parts of the world.
With further instructions regarding their first acts after they
departed from the mount, Jesus directed each one to rise from his
sitting position and fold his arms across the chest in the form of the
Essenian salutation. Then, stepping some paces away from them, but
directly in a line between them and the last edge of the setting sun,
he lifted his hands and arms toward Heaven and prayed. While the
apostles watched and listened, a great light surrounded Jesus and then
a mist formed over his head and gradually enveloped him.
When the mist lifted and ascended toward the sky again, they saw that
Jesus was gone and was no longer before them. In their astonishment,
they looked toward one another as though each expected the other
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 157 —
to make some explanation. A few of them were about to move from
their assigned positions when one of them spoke and said, “Hold, for
were we not warned to remain as we were until the coming of the Holy
Ghost?” Realizing that the time for departure had not yet come, they
remained standing, and in a few minutes there appeared before them
two figures as faintly visible as though they were of a violet light.
One of these figures addressed the standing apostles, saying, “Gaze
no longer into the mists in which your Master has ascended, for as
he left you, so shall he come to you again and again; for his earthly
mission is accomplished and he shall dwell in your hearts and in the
hearts of those who love him and will henceforth direct the mission
of his life through his messengers of light. Receive ye, therefore, from
your Father which art in Heaven, the Holy Ghost and the Word, and by
these ye shall have the power to teach and to demonstrate the spiritual
laws of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the keys to the portals of the
future.” Then the figures disappeared as if dissolving before their eyes.
The apostles then knew that they had been glorified by their Father in
Heaven and that they had received the Holy Ghost.
In quietness and peace the apostles journeyed to their homes in
Galilee to dwell among their brothers and sisters. That night Jesus
appeared among the high priests in the monastery at Carmel and
retired to the rooms that had been set aside for him as his sanctum.
Thus the door of his public life was closed to humanity.
— 158 —
Chapter 17
THE UNKNOWN LIFE OF JESUS
ACCORDING TO THE stories in the Christian Bible, the life of Jesus the Christ ends or culminates with the Ascension. Various other sacred books, originally forming the library of sacred writings from which the present books of the Bible were selected, contained accounts and incidents of the life of Jesus not presented in the selected ones, and for this reason they were rejected. These rejected books of the Bible, which constitute a separate volume, are used today by a great many ecclesiastical authorities because of the interesting light they throw upon many other important incidents of the life of Jesus and his apostles.
The Ascension, as described in the previous chapter of this book, was wholly a mystical and psychic event, and there is nothing in the original accounts of it to warrant the belief that Jesus arose physically or in his physical body in a cloud into the heavens. The words of Jesus that he would go unto his Father, or return to his Father in Heaven, most certainly did not mean to indicate that his physical body would rise, nor did he intend to intimate precisely when or how this return of his spiritual being would occur.
This important event in the life of Jesus must be viewed in the mystical and spiritual sense, the same as his statements regarding the necessity for being born again in order to enter the Kingdom of Heaven. He distinctly explained that in the case of rebirth through repentance, he did not refer to a rebirth of the physical body during the earthly
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 159 —
lifetime of any individual. The idea of the Ascension has, however,
become misunderstood as a spiritual doctrine and it has developed into
a belief in the resurrection and ascension of the physical body. This
misunderstanding, encouraged by theological support, is responsible
for the rejection of many of the Christian doctrines on the part of
those who cannot conceive of these things in a physical and material
sense.
The description of the Ascension given in the books of Mark and
Luke are slightly different, for in one we read that Jesus was received
up into Heaven, and in the other we read that he was carried up into
Heaven. In the Book of Acts, the wording is that he was taken up to
Heaven and a cloud received him out of their sight. In carefully analyzing
these three accounts we note that the cloud which surrounded him and
“received him out of their sight” has a spiritual significance which all
students of mysticism will appreciate. Among the work of the masters
of Tibet, Egypt, and India today, and even in the work of such masters
in the Western world, the formation of clouds or bodies of mist that
can be called out of the invisible to surround a person, and thus shut
one out from the sight of others, is a demonstration often performed
to prove the operation of many cosmic and spiritual laws.
It is not my intention to intimate that the cloud which descended
upon Jesus and shut him out of the sight of the disciples or apostles
was of the same nature as that mystic cloud which the masters today
draw around themselves when they wish to fade out of sight gradually
and disappear temporarily. I believe that the disappearance of Jesus
was unique and has not been duplicated by any of the great masters
or avatars since his time; but I wish to call attention to the fact that
disappearing in this sense or in this manner should not carry with it the
idea that because the cloud or mist arose after Jesus had disappeared,
that Jesus himself, either physically or spiritually, arose with the clouds
into the Heavens. Not being able to see him after the clouds started
to rise, it was natural for the disciples to assume that he was in the
cloud. Later when they wrote their records, and knew that this incident
actually ended his public appearance only, they stated their impressions
as though Jesus had actually disappeared in the cloud, as they believed
at the time.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 160 —
We find, in going over the ancient records, that Krishna, who was
crucified and saved from the dead, was also credited by his followers
with having ascended into Heaven. The ancient description says
that at the time of the ascension a great light enveloped him, and he
disappeared in the light. They also assumed that Krishna returned
with the light as it rose from the earth and returned to Heaven. The
records also show that Buddhas last appearance was on the top of a
rock on a mountain in the presence of his followers, when a great light
surrounded him and he disappeared in the light. Buddhas followers
claimed that he then rose to the celestial regions; and for several
centuries after this occurrence, impressions in the rock were shown to
pilgrims as being those of the feet of Buddha where he stood when the
ascension occurred. Zoroaster, another one of the great avatars, was
also credited in all the pre-Christian accounts with having ascended to
Heaven at the end of his earthly career.
The Egyptians celebrated the resurrection and ascension of Adonis
for many centuries preceding the Christian era. In fact, the festivals in
honor of the resurrection and ascension of Adonis were observed in
Alexandria, Egypt, the very cradle of Christianity, in the time of St.
Cyrio, bishop of Alexandria, A.D. 412, and at Antioch, the ancient
capital of the Greek kings of Syria, during the time of Emperor Julian,
A.D. 361-363.
Even the children of Israel worshiped Adonis under the Jewish
designation of Tammuz, and there was an altar in his name in the
Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem. Several of the Psalms of David were
parts of the liturgical service employed in the worship of Tammuz,
especially the 110th Psalm. On this point, Dr. Parkhurst, the eminent
Jewish authority, says in his book called The Hebrew Lexicon: “I find
myself obliged to refer Tammuz, as well as the Greek and Roman
Hercules, to that class of idols which were originally designed to
represent the promised Saviour (Christ Jesus), the desire of all nations.
His other name, Adonis, is almost the very Hebrew word ‘our Lord,’ a
well-known title of Christ.”
At least twenty other ancient avatars and gods of the people are
credited in the ancient writings with having risen from among the dead
(not out of death) and having ascended into Heaven as the closing
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 161 —
incident of their public careers. It is to be noted that in most cases
there is no intimation that the disappearance of an avatar from public
sight; and the ascension of his spirit to the invisible realm meant a
bodily ascension into the heavens or a cessation of physical existence
on the earth plane. We note that in the ancient teachings regarding the
great avatars, the emphasis was always put upon the fact that the divine
spirit or spiritual light of the avatar returned to God or to the celestial
regions, after which the light of the world went out. These ancient peoples,
whom Christianity called pagans, had no idea of intimating that the
physical body rose or disappeared, except that it remained out of the
sight of the public.
Contrary to this, we have the gradual development, in the Christian
doctrines, of the idea of the Resurrection and the Ascension of the
body in a physical form. Such an idea was not in the original and early
Christian doctrines, but was added in the later centuries, when so
many other Christian doctrines were invented or made theologically
necessary, as explained in an earlier part of this book. This change of
interpretation of the Resurrection and Ascension has caused much of
the argument in modern times against the acceptance of the Christian
doctrines in their entirety.
The disappearance of Jesus from public sight, thus closing his
public work and public mission as the Christ, was not the end of his
existence on the earth plane in the physical body. This is definitely
stated in so many ancient and reliable records that it is surprising that
the founders of the Christian church attempted to make his ascension
a physical fact and proclaim it the end of his earthly career. In many
of the discussions of the church councils in the first centuries after
Christ, there were frank admissions on the part of the greatest of
the authorities that Jesus lived to be fifty, sixty, or even seventy years
of age. In some of these early discussions, the matter of apostolic
succession was taken up and seriously analyzed for many years; and
during those discussions much evidence in the way of writings and
the word-of-mouth traditions was submitted to show that after the
Ascension Jesus had labored with his apostles.
It was not until the doctrine of the Resurrection of the body and
the Ascension of the body in a physical sense appeared to be an
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 162 —
important theological necessity that these early church leaders decided,
in their high councils, to eliminate all references to the activities of
Jesus after the Ascension, and to make the Ascension appear to be the
culmination of his physical existence, as well as of his Christly mission.
The ancient records of the G.W.B. and other records in the
Rosicrucian archives clearly show that after Jesus retired to the
monastery at Carmel, he lived for many years. He then carried on secret
sessions with his apostles and devoted himself, through meditation
and prayer, to the formulation of doctrines and teachings which his
apostles should give to the world.
The original twelve apostles of Jesus were all Gentiles and selected
from among those who were living in Galilee. Perhaps it has never
occurred to the average Christian student to look into the lives of the
apostles and note that all of them were living in Galilee at the time of
their selection to form the private council of the Christ movement.
Of the twelve, all but three—Lebbeus, Paul, and Judas— were of
Aryan blood and were members of the Essenian community. Lebbeus
and Judas were of the Jewish race, but they had adopted the Gentile
religion by becoming heretics and abandoning much of the Jewish
doctrines. After the passing of Judas and others, the vacancies in the
council of twelve apostles were filled by other Gentiles of the Essenian
community selected by the council itself.
The council of apostles met at the monastery, and the members
practically lived in the environs of the monastery because of the daily
sessions that were held in what might be called the apostolic school
or college. It was this college or school that was the basis for the later
establishment of a similar college in the Roman church.
According to the records, Jesus appeared but once a week before
most of the apostles. This was always on a sabbath when a ceremony of
a mysterious nature was held, and all who were not away on missionary
work indulged in a symbolic feast. During the other days of the week,
sessions were held for the purpose of instructing the apostles in their
work, and these were presided over by the several high priests of the
monastery.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 163 —
It is this phase of the work of Jesus with his selected apostles
that constitutes the great unknown period of his life. Only a few
outstanding facts are given in the records regarding the closing years
of his life and his association with the apostles. We find that about ten
days after the retirement of Jesus from public life his apostles were
assembled at a place in Jerusalem for the purpose of establishing the
first congregation of the movement which was to be organized and
known as the Christine Church.
Jesus himself had no part in the foundation of this movement, for
it appears in the records that the apostles anticipated only a public
assembly for the purpose of continuing the Christ teachings. But so
large a congregation assembled, and the power of the Holy Spirit
became so manifest, that the enthusiasm of the men and women and
the prayers and cries of the repenting ones attracted the attention of
scoffers and others. Therefore, it was found advisable to organize the
work of the apostles into a definite movement, having a definite name
and a regular place for meeting. There is nothing in the records to
show that Jesus agreed to this plan or gave it any consideration, since
his contact with the public was ended and his interests were solely in
instructing and guiding the apostles in their own personal development
and comprehension of his teachings, so that they might be proficient
in their work. Ever since the occasion of the Ascension, when the
Holy Ghost came upon the apostles and granted to them the same
authority to carry on his work as he had carried it on, Jesus considered
the apostles his successors as public messengers. Whatever plans they
made to facilitate and improve their work with the public seem to have
received no comment from Jesus, so far as we can find in any of the
records.
After a year had passed, the movement of the Christine Church
developed to such an extent that it was organized in a wider sense
so as to include an inner circle that was devoted exclusively to the
preservation of the Christ teachings and the maintenance of certain
traditions and symbols. It was at this time that the cross, as a Christian
symbol, was adopted; but strange to say, it was not adopted with a
crucified body upon it, but a rose.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 164 —
The Essenes, as a part of the G.W.B., had always used the cross
as a symbol. This device originated as a mystical or esoteric symbol
in the days of Akhnaton, pharaoh of Egypt, who used the cross in
his mystery schools as an emblem of the human body with arms
outstretched, representing the physical body with its sufferings and the
trials of earthly life. The cross at that time had not been used before
for the purpose of crucifixion, but it was used in the mystical sense
because the human body with arms outstretched suggested it, especially
when facing the sun at sunrise in making the usual mystical, morning
salutations; for at such a time the shadow of one’s body thrown upon
the sand is in the form of a cross. The fact that this shadow is but
a passing thing, an unreal thing, and merely of temporary existence,
suggests itself as emblematic of our physical body and physical
existence. In many of the ancient writings of the mystery schools of
Egypt, and even in some of the hieroglyphic writings on the walls of
these mystery schools, the cross was carved or painted in connection
with esoteric principles.
At a time between the adoption of the cross as a symbol of the
physical body and the formation of the Christine Church, a rose was
added to the cross as a second element in the mystical symbol. The
rose was likened to the human soul, because of its gradual unfoldment,
beautiful perfume, richness of color, and manifestation of maturity. By
adding the rose to the cross, the esoteric meaning of the combined
symbol was that the soul personality evolves and becomes rich in
experience and manifestation through the sufferings, trials, tribulations,
and incidents of the physical body and physical existence.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 165 —
The rose was also placed upon a cross as a symbol of the Crucifixion,
like unto the dove, the sun, and the serpent. The crucified rose became
the official symbol of the Rosicrucians, but was used by the various
branches of the Essenes and G.W.B. before its official adoption as a
universal emblem. The emblem of the early Templars was a red rose
on a cross, adopted by them because of its use by the Essenes. In some
of the early mystical manuscripts, we find this rose referred to as the
Nauruts, Natsir, or rose of Isuren, of Tanuil, or Sharon, or the Water Rose,
the Lily, Padma, Pena, Lotus—crucified in the heavens for the salvation of
humanity. Jesus the Christ was called The Rose, and the Rose of Sharon, or
of Isuren. In this we see the relationship of the Rosicrucian emblem to
early Christian mysticism.
Thus the rose and the cross became an emblem of soul expression
through human, physical experience. We can see in this mystical
symbology a beautiful reason for the combination of the rose and
cross as the emblem for the Christine Church. Later in the history
of Christianity, Jesus himself was called the Rose, the Rose of Sharon,
the Beautiful Rose, and the Holy Rose; and the rose on the cross was
interpreted by many to represent the soul of Jesus on the cross, in all
of its beauty and maturity, uncrucified. It was not until many centuries
later that the church authorities, in their high councils, established the
cross with the crucified body upon it as an emblem of the Christine
movement.
The inner circle of the Christine Church also formed itself into a
militant organization for the preservation of its sacred symbol, the
cross, and later adopted a name which, when translated into Latin,
would read Militia Crucifera Evangelica. This militant organization,
which was to include those who would be selected in every country
to represent it and carry on its activities, was to protect its sacred
emblem from being adopted by other unauthorized organizations,
and especially to protect it from being misused and misrepresented
in matters that were not truly according to the Christ principles. This
militant organization finally included the Hospitalers, the Knights
of the Cross, and similar organizations, which were carrying on
humanitarian activities in the name of the cross and in the name of
the Christ principles. For many centuries the organization remained
a very secret and little-known body of several hundred individuals,
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 166 —
controlling and directing the activities of a number of other allied
organizations; and during the time of the Crusades for the redemption
of the Holy Land from the control of the so-called infidels, the Militia
directed and controlled the important activities of the armies.
It is interesting to note, also, that after many centuries had passed,
the organization suddenly became a nonsectarian body of defenders
of the Cross, through a convention called at Liineburg, Germany, on
July 27, 1586, which was sponsored by Henry IV of France, Elizabeth
of England, Frederick II of Denmark, and the potentates of many
other lands. At this convention the ancient records of the organization
were revealed, and the doctrines of the organization and of the
Essenes and the G.W.B. were reviewed and adopted as the rules and
regulations, teachings, and practices of the Militia. All these things
were then compiled into one great book of almost 2,000 pages which
was completed in the year 1604, and officially called the Naometria. The
Militia became an important organization in the prevention of further
wars and forms of persecution in the name of religion. Membership
in the Militia eventually became an honor resulting from unusual and
distinguished service rendered in behalf of the pure symbolism of the
cross and in behalf of humanity’s mystical and religious development.
Early in the formation of the inner circle by the apostles in
Palestine, members thereof were delegated to go to various lands
and spread the work of the newly formed church. Peter was sent into
Jerusalem, Antioch, and Rome. The elder St. James worked also in
Jerusalem. St. John, after some missionary work in Jerusalem, centered
his activities in the establishment of a church at Ephesus. St. Paul
aided, first at Antioch, and then at Iconium, Lystra, Derbe, Troas,
Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, Corinth, and other cities. The
other apostles labored first as assistants in the new churches and then
went off to other lands. The Christine Church thus had its foundation
among the most advanced nations.
In the meantime Jesus outlined and perfected the doctrines and
teachings which he had received through inspiration during the days
of his Christhood, and in the confinement of his sanctum he outlined
these teachings to the high priests and the apostles who came to see
him from time to time. Most of these doctrines and teachings were
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 167 —
preserved by the apostles and especially by the high priests of the
G.W.B., and from these preserved writings the organization extracted
many of the teachings which it now uses throughout the world. An
outline of the secret teachings of Jesus, as revealed in his public and
private sessions with his apostles, disciples, and officers of the G.W.B.,
constitutes a wonderful volume of the principles of metaphysics and
spiritual law. Perhaps these will be given to the public in time, for they
would prove of inestimable value to the student of Christianity and to
the student of mysticism.
The ultimate passing or transition of the great Master Jesus is
recorded in the ancient records as having occurred peacefully and in
the presence of the sisters and brothers in the monastery at Carmel.
His body remained in a tomb on the mount for several centuries, but
it was finally removed to a secret sepulchre guarded and protected by
his brothers and sisters.
Thus endeth the story of the Great Initiate—the Messiah and the
Son of God— the AMEN of the world, Lord and Redeemer.
— 168 —
Appedix
SOME INTERESTING CRITICISMS
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE issuance of the first edition of this book and throughout the worldwide sale of the first and second editions, many letters were received by the author making critical comments regarding the contents of this book. Many of these comments will be interesting to the reader. Naturally, it was expected that this new version of the old stories of the life of Jesus, and the presentation of some hitherto unpublished facts regarding his life, would bring forth many serious objections on the part of Christian orthodoxy and many critical comments from two classes of persons—the defenders of the faith, and the careless students of Christian theology. It was never believed by either the author or the publishers that any of the Christian priesthood or clergy would approve of and endorse the book. Yet this very thing did happen in a great many cases.
One of the interesting facts revealed by the letters of criticism received, and by the critical comments about the book published in various newspaper articles and magazine contributions, is that many eminent Christian clergy who should not have attempted to criticize the book without first becoming well versed in Christian history rushed into print with their condemnations of the book and centered their arguments in one sweeping rebuke. Taking all of these rebukes and melting them, so to speak, into one mold, we find the following words typical of the expression used.
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 169 —
“The author of The Mystical Life of Jesus presents us with a unique
story which challenges many of the statements contained in the Gospel
records, but absolutely fails to give any Christian authority for a single
challenging statement that he makes.”
Other clergy have privately and publicly denounced the book with
the statement that “the author quotes no Christian records, nor any
part of the Gospel records to substantiate the statements he makes.”
Such criticism of the book is unfair, or at least disqualified, for the
book itself claims to be a version different from that generally held by
the Christian authorities relating to the life of Jesus, and common
sense would tell one that an entirely different book with challenging
statements in it could not rest upon quotations taken from the Christian
Bible or the Christian writings.
The author feels that if in writing about the life of Jesus he were
limited to quotations from the Christian histories and to statements
made in the Christian Gospels, there would be no need of writing
another book, for the Christian faiths have given to the world as
interesting and attractive histories of Jesus as their inner light would
permit. To merely re-quote the Gospels would be equivalent to
attempting to paint the lily. If no facts had been discovered which were
contrary to the statements in the Christian Gospels and no further
facts found which were absent in the Christian records, there would
have been no need to prepare another book dealing with the life of
this great Son of God.
It seems strange however, that these Christian clergy could find no
other points upon which to base their sincere objections to the book.
The various chapters of this book make many challenging statements
which if untrue should have been pointed out by the critics of the
book as falsehoods and as unsubstantiated statements, but which if
true should have forced the orthodox Christians to admit that this new
book contained newer light and newer knowledge.
Why, for instance, should all of these clerics in writing their
condemnations of this book refuse to answer or explain away the
statement that Jesus did not live in Nazareth and was not a Nazarene
by virtue of his association with a city that did not exist in his lifetime?
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 170 —
Not one of the thousands of criticisms published about this book by
the orthodox defenders of Christian records contains a single comment
regarding this point. Yet, if the point raised about Nazareth in this
book is true, it opens wide a very large door to a serious criticism of
an important fundamental claim made in behalf of Jesus.
Another interesting point is the fact that none of these learned
or unlearned orthodox critics attempted to show that the records
contained in this book relating to the events of the unknown youth of
Jesus were inconsistent, improbable, or of any importance. Yet to the
thousands of persons who have read the book and valued it, the facts
relating to the youth of Jesus were outstanding in importance because
they cast a very important light upon the whole of the life of Jesus.
It is probably sufficient unto themselves for these critics to throw
the book aside, as they say they have done, or confine it to the rubbish
heap, as they unhesitatingly reveal to the author with the declaration
that “the whole book is an unsupported and uncorroborated piece of
fiction.” Such an attitude has been assumed by the learned and wise
ones throughout all of the ages in regard to every new revelation not
only in the field of religion and philosophy, but in science. It was this
attitude that caused the church to cast aside the words of warning
and the sound advice given by those who became illumined with the
new truths. Many of these were burned at the stake or condemned to
eternal imprisonment, but later made saints. In all ages there have been
those who refused to believe the new facts of life and have condemned
the one who attempted to reveal them.
Among the many peculiar ideas advanced in some newspaper and
magazine communications regarding the book is a typical one which
appeared in the letter column of the New York Sun for August 15, 1929.
In the letters on this page one gentleman wrote his criticism of this
book and made the following comment:
“A letter appeared in your page recently in which it was stated that
H. Spencer Lewis had written a book on the life of Jesus from data
contained in the archives of the Rosicrucian Order. It seems rather
strange to me that after nearly two thousand years something should
turn up that adds anything to our present knowledge on this subject.”
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 171 —
This idea seemed to form the basis of the objection on the part
of a great many readers of the book. Why, they asked, has it taken
almost 2,000 years for such interesting light on the life of Jesus to
find publication? Why, asked others, should we believe that at this late
period in history anything new could be found regarding the life of
Jesus after thousands of investigators or seekers have spent hundreds
of years searching in vain for such matter?
Such questions and critical comments do not deserve extended
answers nor explanations. One might say, why would the forty-niners
who went to California from the East find any gold in the hills after
the padres and the Indians and others had spent scores of years vainly
hunting for gold? Why should astronomers be scanning the sky even at
this very hour in the hope of finding new worlds or new planets after
so many years of minute search that has seemingly revealed everything
that is to be found? Why believe that there can be any light found that
will add to the accumulation of human wisdom? And why, may we
ask, assume that the matter published in this book is “a new and recent
discovery of historical facts”?
Such a claim is not made for the book or the facts it contains. The
facts contained in this book have been known to and preserved by
eminent authors for hundreds of years, and we know that most of
these facts have been called to the attention of prominent clergy of
the world for several centuries, but these clerics refused to publish the
facts, refused to add them to the old records, and refused to reveal the
new facts in any form. But even if these facts had been discovered
only recently and just brought to light for the first time in the history
of the world, it would not be surprising, nor make the facts appear to
be incompatible with truth. Excavations are being made in Egypt and
in parts of the Orient today for the purpose of discovering new facts
relating to human history and the advancement of philosophy and
religion. Each year sees new light cast upon the lives of the people and
the incidents of history relating to the periods covered in the Christian
Bible.
Scores of newspaper clippings have been sent to me along with
magazine accounts and other records showing that in various parts
of the world research work is being carried on with the hope of
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 172 —
finding new facts relating to the life of Jesus and the whole story of
creation as contained in the Christian Bible. Expeditions composed
of archeologists specializing in biblical research and of theologians
devoted to the work of translating and making researches into the
earliest scriptural records have gone forth into Palestine and the Near
East at great expense, exclusively for the purpose of obtaining more
light regarding the periods dealt with in the Christian Bible.
Within recent years such expeditions have brought to light many
new tombs and burial places containing indisputable evidence of early
Christian burial with certain writings, notations, dates, and other facts
which have cast much light upon the life and work of Jesus and his
followers in these countries.
History distinctly tells us that many books of sacred writings were
rejected when the present Christian Bible was compiled. Many of
these rejected books have been brought to light and are found to be of
intense interest. More are being found and translated, and there is no
reason to suppose that all of the facts relating to the life of Jesus have
been uncovered by orthodox investigators or by others.
It is not strange that the Rosicrucian records have contained these
facts for many centuries, and it is not true that the Rosicrucians have
wilfully and deliberately concealed these facts, nor held secret the fact
that they possessed ancient records of this kind; but up to recent years
the best translators and workers on new variations of the Christian Bible
and Christian history have refused to examine the Rosicrucian records
or the records contained in the archives of India, Egypt, and other
lands, on the basis of either prejudice or ecclesiastical condemnation.
Returning again to the statement made in the forepart of this
appendix to the effect that the book has been endorsed by many
eminent clergy, much to the surprise of the author and the publishers,
the author feels that this is the proper place to express his appreciation
to these many learned and broad minded theologians and Christian
advocates who have written him and thanked him for this new history,
and especially for the emphasis that had been given to the mystical side
of the life of Jesus. And there are those Christian workers who have
used chapters from this book in adult Sunday school lessons and in
Bible class lectures over a large number of radio stations. In this wise
MYSTICAL LIFE OF JESUS
— 173 —
the facts contained in the book have been brought to the attention of
many thousands. A direct result of this has been a deeper and more
careful reading and analysis of the pages of the Christian Bible.
The letters of appreciation, endorsement, and requests for the
privilege of quoting from the book in classes and public lectures have
been very pleasing to the author and the publishers, and their sole
purpose in issuing this book has been to give these new facts to the
world. And if these facts can be given without the necessity of further
editions of this book, or the selling of the book, it will bring still
greater joy and happiness to the author and publishers. The publishers
have donated nearly 2,000 copies of the book to the largest libraries
throughout North America so that millions may have the opportunity
to read it. That it will continue to be condemned and criticized is taken
for granted, but the criticism of truth cannot destroy it, and there are
thousands of Christians in the world today who say that their faith has
been strengthened by and through a better and more intimate, as well
as more sympathetic, understanding of the mystical life of Jesus.
THE ROSICRUCIAN ORDER, AMORC
Purpose and Work of the Order
The Rosicrucian Order, AMORC, is a philosophical and initiatic tradition. As students progress in their studies, they are initiated into the next level or degree.
Rosicrucians are men and women around the world who study the laws of nature in order to live in harmony with them. Individuals study the Rosicrucian lessons in the privacy of their own homes on subjects such as the nature of the soul, developing intuition, classical Greek philosophy, energy centers in the body, and self-healing techniques.
The Rosicrucian tradition encourages each student to discover the wisdom, compassion, strength, and peace that already reside within each of us.
www.rosicrucian.org